I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jan11.pdf

============================================================

Special   Issue  on  the  Nuclear  Testing   Crisis
Full  Text  SANE's Comment  on Elsenhower's Action,  P.  2;  Some  Geneva  Documents  on  Muffling,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO. 1JANUARY  11,  1960
101
      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Dr.  Teller's  Latest  Nuclear  Nightmare
The   Father   of   the   H-bomb   seems   determined   to   spawn
more  nightmares.    In  his  campaign  to  continue  nuclear  test-
ing,  he's  back  with  a  new  one,  a  hole-in-the-earth  theory  for
secret  testing  which mankind  needs  (as  Harry  Golden   would
say)  like  a  hole  in  the  head.    The  theory  was  first  presented
in  a  Rand  report  last  March  30   (A   Method   of  Concealing
Underground   Nuclear  Explosions,  R-348)  with  a  note  saying
the  work  "was  undertaken  at  the  suggestion  of  Dr.  Edward
Teller."     According  to  a  Rand  Corp.   release   Dec.   21,   the
day  the  theory was  unveiled  at  a  State  Department  press  con-
ference,  this  study  was  declassified  Oct.  20,  1959   "to  permit
its  use at the Geneva  talks  .  .  . subject  to a  public  release  date
later,  dependent  upon  the  progress  of  the  talks."    The  State
Department  complained  that  Soviet  scientists  at  Geneva   had
rejected  this  theory  that  the  size  of  the  tell-tale  seismic  signal
from   an  underground  blast  could  be  reduced   300-fold.     A
week  later  some  of  the  scientists  who  worked  on  it  made  a
joint  presentation  at  an  American  Physical  Society  meeting  at
Pasadena.     A   prepared   summary   was   made   available   the
same day in Washington  by the  AEC.   The  impression created
was  that   this  new   method   for   muffling   nuclear   explosions
could  (as  the  New  York  Times  reported  Dec.  30)   "make  the
international  test-detection  program  virtually  useless."
Could You Hide All That  Digging?
The  Russians  at  first  rejected  but  finally  accepted  the  theory
(as   the  reader  can  see  for   himself   on   page   three).     The
problem  on  which  the  British  as  well  as  the  Russians  have
doubts,  is  whether  it  can  be  successfully  applied   in  practice
on   any   significant   scale.     A   mere  important  question,   not
touched  on  at  Geneva,-  arises  in  the  sphere   of   intelligence:
even  if  you  could  hide  the  nuclear  explosion,  could  you  hide
the  work  of  building  the  hole?    There  seems  to  be  general
agreement  here  that  the  easiest  kind  of  movement  for  intelli-
gence  to  spot  are  large-scale  digging   operations.     Even  for
a   100-kiloton   shot   the   job   of   digging   the   hole   would   be
enormous.    A  scientist  friend  kindly  translated   the   formula
given  by  the  U.  S. delegation  into  tonnages  for  us.    A  cavity
large  enough  for  a  100-kiloton   shot  in  hard  rock  would  re-
quire   the   movement  of   25,000,000   tons   of   rock   or   about
5,000,000  truck loads.   For  a  cavity  in  salt,  the  tonnage  would
be  somewhat  smaller,  closer  to  20,000,000  tons.    Some figures
we  obtained  from  the  Bureau  of  Mines  show  the  magnitude
of  these  operations.   Total  rock  salt  mined  in  this  country  in
1958  was  5,407,000   tons.    Teller's  "big  hole"  in  salt  would
require  the  movement of  four  times  that  much.   Total  produc-
tion  of  anthracite  coal  last  year,  on  which  21,000  men  were
employed,   was   19,500,000   tons.    To   take   from   one   hole
more  tonnage  of  rock  than  is  taken  in  one  year  from  all  the
1  *
anthracite  mines  of  Pennsylvania  would  be  a  formidable  and
terribly  expensive  task,  taking  several  years,  if  feasible.
Constructive  Proposals Pigeon-Holed
Perhaps   this   is  why  the   Berkner  panel,   assigned   by   the
White  House  last  year  to  study  all  the  new  data,  treated  this
deep  hole  muffling  theory  with  such  equanimity  (see   excerpt
on  page  3),  although  several  of  those  who  worked  on  the
Rand  report  also  served  with  the  Berkner  panel.    Five  days
after   the  Berkner  panel  report  was  made  available  in  sum-
mary  form  last  year,  the  President   (June  17)   was  asked  by
the  Time   magazine  correspondent   about  these  new   muffling
techniques.   Mr.  Eisenhower's  answer  brushed  them  aside.  The
Berkner  panel  in  its  report  to  him  had  concluded   that  with
the  development  of  fresh  ideas available  in  the  field  of  seismic
detection,   the  Geneva   control   system  agreed   upon   in   1958
could   be   restored   to   full   effectiveness   within   three   years.
Unfortunately  its  recommendations  for  research  and   develop-
ment  have  been  pigeon-holed   while  Pentagon  and  AEC  pour
their   energies  into  every  idea  like  Teller's  hole-in-the-earth
which  promises  to  upset  the  possibilities   of  agreement.     As
recently  as  November   17,  in  a  letter  to  Senator   Humphrey,
the   President   said   that   while   any   disarmament   agreement
carried   "some   risks,  at  least  theoretically,  of   evasion"   these
must   be   balanced   against   "the   enormous   risks   entailed   if
reasonable  steps  are  not  taken  to  curb  the  international   com-
petition   in  armaments."     The   President   would   hardly   have
spoken  so confidently if  he  thought  the  Teller  muffling  theory
represented   a  practical  technique  which   "made   the  interna
1
tional  test-detection  program  virtually  useless."     Indeed   the
President   made  no  reference  to  this   muffling   theory  in   the
statement  he  issued  at  Augusta,  Ga.,  Dec.  29  angrily announc-
ing  that  the  U.  S. considered  itself  free  to  resume  tests  at  any
time  but  would  give  notice  if  it  did  so.
How  Federov  Helped  McCone
The   tone  of  this  statement  reflects  the  use  made  by  AEC
Chairman  McCone  of  the  bitter  language   by  Mr.  Federov  in
his  final  report  for  the  Soviet  delegation.     This  cast   doubt
on  "the  quality  and  objectivity  of  the  figures  that  were  sup-
plied  by the  Americans"  and  attacked  the  U.  S. delegation  for
"tendentious   use  of   one-sidedly  developed   material   for   the
purpose   of   undermining  confidence  in   the   control   system"
agreed  upon  at  Geneva  in  1958.    This  broadside  attack,  which
reflected  on  members of  the  U.  S. delegation  like  Dr.  Fisk  and
Dr.  Bethe,  who  are  not  in  the  Teller  camp,  played  into  the
hands  of  those  who  want  to  resume  testing.
The   participants   in   that   75   minute   conference   at   the
(Continued  on  Page  Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  11, 1960
Scientists  Say  Even  Small Underground Tests  Still  Very Difficult  to Hide
One  Veto-Free  Inspection  Every  Two  Weeks  Called  Ample  for  Policing
By  The  National  Committee  for  A  Sane Nuclear
Policy
With  the  announcement by  President  Elsenhower  that  the
United  States  will  refrain   from  nuclear  weapons  tests  for
the  present,   but  not  continue  its   formal  moratorium,  the
efforts  to  secure  a  workable  and  inspected  treaty  on  ending
tests  enter' a  crucial  phase.    The  wording  of  the  American
announcement   was  intended   to  speed   up  the   Geneva  talks
and  increase  pressure  on  the  Russians.    Unfortunately   an
opposite   effect   is  equally  possible.    The  stated  position   of
the  British;  that  they  would  not  interrupt   the  moratorium
as  long  as  the  talks  continue,  is  a  more  useful  one.
If   further   progress   is   to   be   registered,   the   following
principles  must  be  kept  in  mind:
Every    inspection   system    for    disarmament    undermines
internal  security   systems.
On  the  Soviet  side,  there  is  surely  substantial  tearfulness
of  the  internal  security  effects.    This  factor  probably  plays
a  lesser,  but  still  important  role  on  the  American   side.
Every   inspection   system   has   limits   of   accuracy.
Some  of   the   limits   on  instrumental   observation   can   be
cushioned   by   on-the-spot  inspection   of   events   of  doubtful
meaning.     Such   inspection,    however,   clearly   invokes    the
internal  security  effects  noted  above, and  is  therefore  under-
rated  by  the  Soviet  Union.
Some Basic Questions
The  limits  of  accuracy  of  seismic  and  observation   systems
that  are  implied  in  the  published  reports  on the  Nevada  and
allied  tests  in  the  United  States  must  be  evaluated  in  terms
of  the  following  questions:
(A)   What   is   the   military   significance   of  the   explosion
sizes  that  are  clearly  beyond  the  reliable  observation  capa-
bility  of  a  system?
If  this  military  significance  is  not  overriding,  there  are
strong  grounds  for  embarking  on  an  agreement.    Two  facts
are  particularly  relevant:
•  1.  The  apparent  availability  of  sufficient  nuclear  explosives
for   "overkill."
2.  The  fact  that  the  military  establishment  is  now  mainly
interested  in  improving  big  bombs  for  missiles.     Explosions
of   these   megaton-range   devices   cannot   be   hidden   in   the
foreseeable   future.
(B)   Is  refinement  for  greater  precision in detection  systems
a  reasonable  expectation  in  light  of  the  present  state  of  the
technical  arts  involved?
The  answer  to  this  question  must  be  an  unqualified  "yes".
The   Russian   willingness  to   consider   means   of   improving
detection,  manifest  in  the   recent   scientific  meeting,  is  im-
portant  in  this  respect.   Provision  for  research  and  develop-
ment  and  for  revision  of  inspection  systems  must  be  written
into  all  arms  control   agreements.   The  Draft   Treaty  being
considered  has  such  provisions.
Much  Effort  on  Evasion, Too Little  on Detection
If  indeed  the  agencies  concerned  had  expended  a  compar-
able  amount  of  effort   and  funds  on  improving  methods  of
detection   as  they  have  in   evolving  modes  of   evasion,   the
task  before  us  would  be  much  less  confused.
Two  kinds  of  demand  have  the   effect    of  frustrating    inter-
national  arms  control  agreement.
(a)   A  demand  for  inspection  without  social  effects,  within
the  countries  being  inspected.
(b)   A  demand for  flawless  reliability.
In  the  recent  scientific meeting  on detection  of  underground
explosions,  the   Soviet   Union  and  the   United   States   were
unreasonable  with  regard  to  the  first  and  second  of  these
points   respectively:
The  Soviet  Union  proposed  that  seismic  signals  so  large
We  reprint  here  the  full  text  of  the  statement  by  the
National  Committee for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy  on  the
crisis  in the  Geneva test  negotiations.  Though  generally
ignored  by  the  press,  it  is  the  best  we have  seen  on  the
tangled  technical  issues.   The  statement  was  prepared
by  the  Committee's  Science  Advisory  Group  of  which
the  co-chairmen  are  Dr.  Seymour  Melman,  Industrial
Engineering  Department,  Columbia  University,  and  Dr.
Hugh  C. Wolfe,  Dept.  of  Physics,  Cooper Union.
that  they  were  meaningless,  be  used  to  set  the  criteria  for
on-site  inspection.    They  were  in  addition  unreasonable  in
not  considering data  from  American tests,  and  in  not  examin-
ing  the  possibility  of  muffling  explosions  in  excavated  cavi-
ties.*    The   United  States,   on  the   other   hand,   suggested
signals  so  low  as  to  be  confused  with  background  noise  used
to  establish  the  inspection criteria.    Under this  concept every
disturbance  would  be  eligible for  on-site  inspection,  requiring
unrealistic  numbers  of  sorties   [for  on-site   inspection].
Basically,   however,  the   question  is   a  political   one,  and
not  a  scientific   one,  in  which  the  risks   of   any   agreement
must   be  weighed  against  the  risks  of  having  none.
The  possibility  of  muffling  kiloton-range  underground  ex-
plosions  and  the  problem  of  detecting  very  small  explosions
must  now  be  accepted  as  part  of  the  "calculated  risk."    It
should  be  emphasized, however, that  a  combination of  on-site
inspection  and  available  instrumentation  will  render  it  extra-
ordinarily  difficult  to  hide  such  tests.
The  Truth  About  Teller's  "Big  Hole"
It  should  also  be  noted  that  there  is  a  wide  discrepancy
between  what  is  theoretically  possible  and what  is  technically
realistic.    With  regard  to  excavations  to  muffle   explosions,
no  one  has  ever  dug  a  hole  as  large  as  those  suggested   to
muffle  a  100-KT  explosion.    If  it  should  prove  possible,  the
expense  would  exceed that  of  the  nuclear  device by  hundreds
of  times,  the  excavation would require  several  years,  and  be
difficult   to  hide.    The  same  is  true  regarding   explosions  in
"outer   space."
Thirty  on-site  inspections  per  year  in  Russia,  and  a  similar
number  in  the  United  States,  together  with  instrumentation
now  possible,  provide  sound  initial   measures  for  an  inspec-
tion  system.   The  quota  of  30 inspections  will  involve random
sampling  of  large  and  small  signals,   at  the  rate  of  about
one  every  two  weeks.
A  first  agreement   of  this  sort  will—
(a)   Establish  the  principle  of  mutual   inspection.
(b)   Result  in  installation  of  a  degree  of  actual   inspection
from  which  lessons  can  be  learned  and  precedents   set.
(c)  Provide  the  world  a  "breathing  spell"  from  the  multi-
plication  of nuclear  powers  and  the  drift  toward  nuclear  war.
A  first  agreement  can  be  followed   up  with  more  stringent
measures.
A  treaty  ending  all  nuclear  tests  under  adequate   controls
remains  a  technically  feasible  possibility.    The  United  States
should  not  relent  in  its  efforts  to  secure  such  a  treaty.
*Our  own  reading  of  the  final  reports  and  the  transcript
of   the   technical   sessions   of   Geneva  do   not   support   this
statement.    The  Soviet  scientists  disagreed  with  ours  on  the
Hardtack  tests  and  the  muffling  idea  but  certainly   discussed
both  at  great  length.   As  for  the  criteria—the  Russians  on
Dec.  3 put  forward  a  set  of  criteria  which  were  not  only  ap-
pallingly restrictive but  would  give rise to prolonged wrangles
over  interpretation.   These  were  dropped  in  their  final report.
—IPS
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  11, 1960
A  Page for  Scientist  Readers  Who Want  More Facts on Teller's Newest  Nightmare
The  Basic  Geneva  Documents  on  The  "Big  Hole"  Theory  for  Hiding  Tests
Because  many  scientists  are  subscribers   to  the  Weekly,
because  the  basic  documents on the  nuclear  crisis  in Geneva
are  so  hard  to  obtain,  and  because  of  the  interest   in  the
Teller  theory of hiding tests  in  cavities,  we reprint  here  the
full  text  of  those  portions  of  the  final  reports  turned  in  by
the  scientists  in  Geneva, which  state  their   different  views
on  this  possibility.   We  also  give  that  section  of  the  Berk-
ner  report  which  discusses  the  "big  hole"  theory  though  in
veiled  terms because it  was still  classified  at  that  time.   We
would  like  to  hear   from   scientist   readers   in  order   more
fully  to  understand  these  technicalities   which  have  created
a  new obstacle  to  agreement.   We ask  non-scientist  readers
to  excuse the  devotion of  so  much space  to  highly  technical
matters  but  believe  it  justified  in  the  interests  of  peace.
—IFS
What  the  U.S.  Delegation  Said:
"Rigorous  theoretical   calculations  combined with  measure-
ments  on  the  Rainier  explosion  show  that  the  seismic  signal
produced  by  an  explosion in  a  sufficiently  large  underground
cavity  in  salt  or  hard  rock  will  be  reduced by  a  factor  of 300
or more relative  to  the  seismic  signal  from  an  explosion of  the
same   yield  under  Rainier   conditions.    Calculations   indicate
that  a  cavity  at  a  depth  of about  one kilometer  with  a  volume
of  7  x  IO
4
  cubic meters  per  kiloton  should   suffice.
"Cavities  are  known to  exist  in salt formations \vhich would
satisfy   the  volume  requirement   for   explosions  at   least   as
large  as  70 kilotons.   The total  construction  time  for  a  cavity
of  this  size  in  a  salt  dome  is  estimated  to  be  from  2  to  4
years."
What  the British Delegation  Said:
"Theory  shows  that  the  seismic  signal  generated  by  a  nu-
clear  explosion  in  an  underground  cavity  can  be  much  less
than  that  from   an  equal  explosion  in  RAINIER  conditions.
The  theory  assumes  that  the  cavity  is  sufficiently  large  and
deep  for  the  material  around  the   cavity,  right  up  to  the
boundary  surface,  to  behave  elastically.   Calculations  indicate,
for  example, that  a  cavity  in salt,  one kilometer  below ground
level,  of  volume 7  x  IO
4
  m
3
  per  kilton,  should  suffice  to  meet
the  theoretical   requirements.
"The   theory   assumes   a   perfect   isotropic   medium,  and
makes   certain   assumptions   about   the   stress    distribution
around  the  cavity  before  the  explosion  occurs.   Careful  work
would  have  to  be  done  before  it  could  be  stated  that  condi-
tions  likely  to  be  met  in  practice  do  not  require  the   theory
to  be modified.   .However,  it  may  well  be  possible  in  practice,
should  the  necessary   scientific  research  and  engineering   ef-
fort  be  found,  to  give  confidence  that  a  decoupling  factor  of
two  orders  of magnitude  compared with  RAINIER  conditions
could  be  achieved.
"Experiments    have   been   made   to   compare   the    seismic
signals  at  about  one  mile  from  high  explosive  charges,   ex-
ploded  in  an  underground  cavity,  with  those  given  by  smaller
'  charges  placed  a  few feet  from  the  cavity  in the  surrounding
Big  Enough for  A Dozen RCA Buildings
"However,  to  apply  cushioning  to  a  100 kiloton  bomb
would  require  an  underground  cavity  800 feet  in  diame-
ter   (large  enough  to   hold   a   dozen  RCA  buildings).
Such  grandiose  man-made  chamber  would  be  very  ex-
pensive  and might take  several  years to build,  according
to  Dr.  Harold   Brown,  associate  director   of  Livermore
Laboratory."
—Prof.   Jay   Or ear   (Physics,   Cornell),  chairman  of
the  'disarmament   committee,   Federation   of   American
Scientists,  letter  to  New   York   Times,  Jan.   6.
Skeptical British View
"British   experts  accept  the  theoretical   argument  of
the  'large  hole'  and  most  of  the  American   arguments
derived  from   the  Nevada  underground  explosion.   But
the  British  believe that  much more experiment  is  needed
before  firm  conclusions  can  be  drown.  They  also  doubt
whether  the  large  hole'  could be  made to  work  in  prac-
tice  as  a  way  of  concealing  significant  nuclear-weapon
development."
—Robert  Stephens,  diplomatic  correspondent,  London
Observer,  Jan.  S.
limestone.    Apparently  ten   times   as   much   explosive   was
required  in  the  cavity  as  in  the   surrounding   limestone   to
give   equal  seismic  signals.     A  decoupling  factor   of   about
one  order  of  magnitude  in  limestone  has  thus  been  demon-
strated  for  one  cavity  which  was  smaller  and  less  deep  than
those  demanded  by  the   above-mentioned  theory.
"Cavities  are  known to  exist  in salt formations  which would
satisfy  the  volume and depth  requirements  for  a  few  kilotons.
The  cavities  are  not  spherical  shape  and  the  stress  distribu-
tions  around  the  cavities  are  not  known."
The Soviet Delegation Said:
"During  discussion  of  the  amplitude  of  the  seismic  signal
produced  by  an  underground  nuclear   explosion,  the   U.  S.
delegation  introduced  the  idea  that  the  seismic  signal  could
be  disguised  by  carrying  out  the  explosion  in  a   sufficiently
deep  and large underground  cavity.   The  U.  S. experts'  views
on  the  possibility  of  considerably reducing  the  seismic  signal
under  such  conditions  are,   in  the   main,  based   on  general
considerations  of theory.   However, even from  the  theoretical
point  of  view,  the  earth's   crust  is  a  very  complex  medium.
Therefore,   a  combination  of  formal  mathematical   solutions
for   the   problems   involved   in   the   dissimulation   of   under-
ground  explosions  does  not  as  yet   offer   a  sound  basis  for
any  findings  relating  to  the  possible  amplitude  of  the  seismic
signal   generated   by   an   explosion  in   a   deep   underground
cavity  or  to  the  technical  feasibility  of  carrying   out  vast
underground  construction  operations  at  a  depth  of  the  order
of  one  kilometre."
What the Berkner Report Said:
"In  considering  the  possibility  that  the  capabilities,  now
or  in  the  future,  of  the  Geneva  System  might  be  reduced  by
the  intentional  concealment  of  underground  tests,  the   Panel
concluded  that   decoupling  techniques   existed   which   would
reduce  the  seismic  signal  by  a  factor  of  ten  or  more.   More-
over,  preliminary  theoretical   studies  have  shown  that  it  is
possible  in  principle  to  reduce  the  seismic  signal  from   an
explosion  by  a  much  greater  factor  than  this.   Nevertheless,
in  view  of  the  many  complexities  involved,  it  is  necessary
that  these ideas be tested  with  appropriately  designed  experi-
ments  to determine  how large a  decoupling factor  can actually
be  realized  in  practice.    While  many  of  these  tests  can  be
carried  out  with  high  explosives,  complete  evaluation  of  the
theory  probably  cannot  be  made  without  nuclear  explosions.
Such   tests   may   also   disclose   some   characteristics   which
might   allow  long  range  detection  of  such  decoupled   under-
ground  tests."    (Italics  added—IFS.)
—Report  of  the  Berkner  Panel  appointed  by  the  President
to  review   the  feasibility   of  improving   the  detection  system
agreed-  upon  in  Geneva  in  1958;  from   the  summary   made
public  June  12;  two  of  those  who  worked  on  the  Teller  "big
hole"  theory,  Prof.   David  T.  Griggs  and  Dr.  Albert  Latter,
also  worked  with  the  Berkner   panel.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January   11, 1960
Anderson Statement Shows Advocates of Resumption Want Atmospheric Tests
(Continued   from   Page One)
Augusta  National   Golf   Club  took   advantage   of  Mr.  Eisen-
hower's  temper.     The   statement  he  was  persuaded   to   issue
gave   the  impression   that   the  Soviet  scientists  had  failed  to
give   "serious  scientific  consideration"   to  the  new  data pre-
sented   by  the  U.  S.  delegation   and  had  utilized  "technically
unsupportable"  arguments.     We  do  not  think  the  verbatiori
transcript  available   at  the  State  Department  bears  this out.
This  may  explain   the  failure  to  produce   that   statement   the
President  promised  in which  the  U.  S. delegation  would  "make
public  from  the  verbatim  records  of  the  conference  the   facts
which  will  completely   refute  the  Soviet  document." *    The
verbatim  shows  the  Russians not  only  discussed  the  new  data
at  length  but  revised  some  of  their  own  opinions,  as  did  the
U.  S.  delegation.     Russian  objections,  far  from  being  "tech-
nically  unsupportable,"   were  buttressed  by  seismological   data
and  mathematical   demonstrations  of  their own.
A  Pot  and Kettle  Argument
The   President   accused   the   Soviet   scientists  of  being "po-
litically  directed"  but  this  was  true  of  both  sides.    The  final
report  from  the  Soviet  side  accused  the  U.  S.  delegation   of
"even  some  misrepresentation"  in  presenting   material   which
all   tended   "in   one   single   direction—towards   reducing   the
estimates  of   the  control   system's  effectiveness."    The   U.  S.
delegation  might  have  answered  that  all  the  Soviet  statements
similarly  tended  in  the  direction  of  overestimating  the  control
system's  effectiveness.    Their  delegation  was  operating  in  the
framework  of  a  national  policy  which  seeks  to  cut  down   the
number  of  on-site  inspections  in  fear  of  espionage.    Ours  was
operating  in  the  framework  of  a  national  policy  which  seeks
to  maximize  the  number  of  inspections  in  fear  that  the  Rus-
sians  may  carry  on  tests  in  secret.
The  truth,  as  Sir  Michael  Wright  summed  it  up  very  ably
for   the  British  delegation  just  before  adjournment  on Dec.
* Although  Mr.  Ha?:erty  promised  such  a  refutation  "within
a   few  days"  (Baltimore  Sun,  from  Augusta,  Ga., Dec.  30),
Slate   Dept.   says   it   knows   of   no  plans   to   issue   anything
further   than  its  release  of  Dec. 29  giving   Dr.  Fisk's  reply
to  the  Russians  at  Geneva  on  Dec.  19.
19  is that  seismology  is  still  a  very  young  and  inexact  science.
More  study  and  development   is  called  for  and  there  will  be
less  wrangling  if  this  could  be  done  jointly—as  Sir  Michael
suggested—so   that   both   sides  would   be   satisfied   with   the
conditions  observed  and  with  the  results  obtained.
Everything   we   read   in   the   verbatim   convinced    us   of
the  wisdom  of  the  proposal  put  forward  by Senator  Humphrey
in  his Oct. 30  speech  at  Pontiac,  Michigan,  where he  proposed
an  agreement  to  bar  all  tests  above  5  kilotons  and  then  make
a  joint  study  of  how  to  detect  those  below  5  kilotons  during
a  two  year  moratorium   on  the  smaller  shots.    It  is,  after all,
only  in  this  low  range  that  the  difficulties  of  detection  arise.
Ill-Advised and Petulant
The  President's  decision  not  to  extend  our  own  moratorium
beyond  Dec.  31 seems  to us hasty and  ill-advised.   He  had  just
returned  from  a world  tour  as a  leader  for  peace.  The  nuclear
test  announcement sent  a  tremor  of  anxiety  through  the  hearts
of  millions the  world  over  who  had  placed  their  trust  in  him.
If  nuclear  tests  resume,  the  arms  race  and  world  tension  are
likely  to  spiral  upward  again.    Our  action  was  taken  in  the
face  of  a  resolution  passed  only  a  few  weeks  earlier, 76-to-O,
by  the  United  Nations  General   Assembly.    This   resolution,
by  Austria,  Japan  and  Sweden,  called  on  the  nuclear  powers
"to   continue  their   present   voluntary  discontinuance  of   the
testing  of  nuclear  weapons."     The  U.  S.  itself  voted  for  the
resolution.     Finally   Mr.   Elsenhower's   action   must   be   seen
against  the  background  of  the  Paris  meeting  with  our  NATO
allies   which  was  intended  to   demonstrate  our   readiness   to
confer  with  them  on  all  matters  of  mutual  concern.    Yet  the
President  acted  on  so  momentous  a  matter  without  consulting
our  European allies  (Washing/on   Post,  Dec.  31)  or  even  our
British  partner   in  the  nuclear  talks  (Baltimore  Snn,  London
Bureau,  Dec. 30).    On  a  matter  which  so  deeply  concerns  all
mankind,  we  acted  in  a  way  which  gives  the  appearance  of
swift  and  arbitrary  petulance.    Even  if  the  President  intended
only  to  put  bargaining  pressure  on  the   Russians,  the  result
will  be to build up  more  pressure on  him  at  home  for  resump-
tion  of  tests,  and  as  Senator Anderson  indicated the  advocates
of  testing  will  not  be  satisfied  to  keep  them  underground.
You  Can  Still  Take  Advantage  of  Holiday   Gift   Rates  to  Start  A  New  Gift   Sub   With  This  Issue
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5fil8   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street    .............................................................;..........„..............
City     ........................................Zone............State...................
1/11/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zoiie............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
IPS To Speak Community Church, Boston, Sunday Morning, Jan. 17 on Nuclear Testing Crisis
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED