I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960oct17.pdf

============================================================

Why  It  Would  Be Smart  to Recognize Peking Now,  P.  2
Kennedy's  Latest  on  Nuclear  Policy  Implies  Acceptance of  The  Spread  of  Atomic Anns,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO. T
OCTOBER  IT,  I960
101
     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Mark Twain Would Have Enjoyed Dr. Pauling's Inquisition
Washington,  Oct.   11
Senator  Dodd,  in  opening  the  hearing  of  Dr.  Linus  Pauling
before   the   Internal  Security  Committee   here   today,   showed
himself   to  be  in  the   finest  tradition  of   American   dead-pan
humor.    Anticipating  Dr.  Pauling's  refusal  to  hand  over  the
names  of  those  who  helped  gather  signatures  for  his  famous
petition  to  the  UN  on  nuclear  testing,  Senator  Dodd  said  no
witness  need  fear  "opprobrium  because  he  is  called  to  testify
before  this  Committee."    To   clinch  his  point   he  cited  the
cases  of  FBI  Chief  J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  CIA  Director   Allen
Dulles,  both  of  whom had  appeared  before  it,  he  said,  without
indelible  stain  on  their  reputations.*    This  opening   remark
met  competition  for  a  Mark  Twain  award  when  the  commit-
tee's  counsel,  Jules  Sourwine,  tirelessly  digging  for   subversive
tendencies  among  the  signers  of  the  petition,  asked  Dr.  Paul-
ing  whether  he  was  aware  that  there  were  "known   Commu-
nists"  among  the  members  of  the  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences
who  had  put  their  signatures  to  it.    The  least  the  Russians
can  do  in  return  for   this  reassuring  news  is  to  elect   Cyrus
Eaton  to  membership  so  there  will  be  one  known   capitalist
on  the  rolls, too.
The  DW's Most  Faithful  Reader
Mr.   Sourwine   followed   this   revelation   with   an   analysis
prepared  by Benjamin Mandel  showing  Dr.  Pauling's   "affilia-
tions   with   Communist-controlled   organizations   or   activities
supporting  the  Communist  Party,  USA, or  individual mem-
bers   thereof."     Mr.   Mandel,   the   research   director   of   the
committee,  was  once  business  manager  of   the   now   defunct
Daily   Worker,   and   remains  its  most  faithful   reader   in   the
capital;  he  has  been   over  its  crumbling  files  so  often   there
must  be  whole'years  he  can  recite  from  memory.    Of   his
25   "citations"  21  were   butttressed   in   scholarly   fashion   by
references  to  DW  or  SW  Sunday  Worker;  five  by  references
to  DPW,  the  now  defunct  People's  Daily   World,   its   Pacific
Coast  analogue;  and  two  to  "Lttrhd"  no  doubt  obtained  for
the  committee  by  repentant  Marxist-Leninists   now   practicing
free  enterprise  for  the  FBI.   Mr.  Handel's  research  always
pointed  leftward, of  course,  never  right;  thus  Dr.  Pauling  was
put  down  for  signing  a  statement  against  the  McCarran  In-
ternal  Security  Act  (DW  9/21/59,  p.  9),   but  no   reference
was  made  to  the  fact  that  President   Truman   vetoed   the  act
the  very  next  day  (9/22/50).
The  Pauling  hearing  reached  its  climax  early  when  he sub-
mitted  the  original  signatures  appended  to  his  petition   but
* Of  course  neither  was   asked  in  the   manner  sometimes
encountered  by  less  august  witnesses  whether  he  had  ever
consorted   with   Fascists,    robbed  a   poor   box   or   practiced
necrophilia.
1  0  *
Communist  Caucus  in   SANE?
Mr.  Sourwine.   Is  there,  Mr.  Abrants,  a  Communist
caucus   within   the   Committee  for   A   Sane   Nuclear
Policy?
Mr.  Abrams.    I  must  decline  to  answer  that  on  the
grounds  previously  stated.
Sen.  Dodd.   Would you  repeat  that  question  for  me?
Mr.  Sourwine.   Is  there  a  Communist  caucus  within
the  Committee  for  a  Sane  Nuclear  Policy?
Sen.  Dodd.    Caucus?
Mr.  Sourwine.  Yes.
Mr.  Abrams.   My  answer  has  been  recorded.
Mr.  Sourwine.    Do  you  know what I  mean by  a Com-
munist  caucus,  Mr.  Abrams?
Sen.   Dodd.    Well,  I  don't.    The  witness  is  deciding
whether  he  is  answering  that  question  or not.  I  don't
know  what  it  means.   Tell  me.
Mr.  Sourwine.   I  would  rather  have  the  witness  an-
swer  first,  if  he  knows  what  is  meant  by  a Communist
caucus.
Mr.  Abrams.   I  decline  to  answer  for  the  same rea-
sons.
Sen.  Dodd.    Educate  me,  Mr.  Sourwine.
Mr.   Sourwine.    A   Communist   caucus  is   a   smaller
organized   unit   within  a  particular  organization;  that
is,  it  is  the  Communist  group,  usually  a  minority,  and
the  caucus  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  helping  take con-
trol  of  the  organization,  making  themselves  most  effec-
tive.
Mr.  Abrams.   I  won't  refuse  to  answer  that.    I  have
never  heard  of  it  before.
—P.  25,  Communist  Infiltration   in  the  Nuclear   Test
Ban  Movement,  Senate   Internal   Security   Hearing  re-
leased  Oct. 12,  testimony   of  Henry  H.  Abrams.
declined  again  to  furnish  the  names  of  those  who  helped  him
circulate  it.    The  hearing  went  on  for  hours  afterward,  past
luncheon   recess  and  midway  to  five  o'clock,  with   questions
which  ranged  wide  in  time  and  space.    Had  he  ever  been  to
East  Berlin?    No.    Was  he  once  chairman  of  a  committee  to
welcome  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  to  Los  Angeles ?   Yes.   Had
he  ever  known   Ethel  Rosenberg?    No.    Did  he  know   that
Prof.  Yakawa  one  of  his  Japanese  signers  had  been  awarded
the  Lenin  Prize?    No,  but  he  knew  he  got  the  Nobel  prize.
The  committee's  counsel  went  all  the  way  back  to  Bernstein's
Fish  Grotto  in  San  Francisco,  scene  of  the  most  improbable
fish  story  ever  brought  up  by  the  House  Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee.    Did  Dr.  Pauling  know  that  Martin  Kamen
one  of  his  signers  was  named  in  a  1948  Un  Am  report   on
atomic  espionage  as  having  "very  definitely"  given   "classified
information"  to  Soviet  officials  in  Bernstein's  Fish  Grotto dur-
ing World  War  II  while  agents  listened  in  from  an  adjoining
booth?  Dr.   Pauling  as  very  definitely   remembered  that   Dr.
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 17, 1960
We  Ought  to  Initiate  Negotiations  With  Communist  China  Now
The  election  campaign  seems  to  have  turned  into  a  battle
over  the  islands.    Kennedy, one  might  summarize  it,  wants  to
give  up  Quemoy  and  Matsu,  and  reoccupy  Cuba.*    But  the
Quemoy-Matsu  issue,  on  which  Kennedy  makes  more   sense
than  Nixon,  is  already  dated.    The  real  question  which  ought
to  be  debated  now  is  the  future  of  Formosa.    We  are  always
talking   of  taking  the  initiative.    But  to  take   the   initiative
requires   daring  and   imagination.    The   vote  in  the   United
Nations   shows  that  we  cannot  hope  much  longer  to   impose
our  will  against  a  majority  of  mankind  and  keep  Communist
China  out  of  the  UN.     If  the  United   States  were  not  ham-
strung  by  the  sinister   power   which  Chiang's   men   exert   in
American   politics,   we   would   take   the   initiative   and   open
negotiations   with   Peking.     No   Chinese   regime   will   ever
reconcile  itself  to  the  loss  of  Formosa  much  less  to  its  use
as  a  base  by  a  hostile   power  from   across  the  Pacific.     But
an  agreement  which  would  save  face  all  around,  and   enable
Chiange  to  live  out  his  remaining  years  on  a  Formosa  feder-
ated  with  the  mainland, is possible,  as  broadcasts  from  Peking
have  hinted  from  time  to  time.
Formosa  "An  Area  of  Freedom"?
From  the  standpoint   of  power   politics,  negotiations  with
Peking  would  be  shrewd.    For  the  signs  of  a  sharp  difference
within  the  Soviet  bloc  were  made  plain  enough  by the  failure
of  the  other  Communist  States   (except   Albania)   to  be  rep-
resented  at  the  recent  anniversary  celebrations  in  Peking.   To
reopen  China's  doors  on  the   Pacific  by  diplomatic   relations
with  the  U.S.  and  its  ally,  Japan,  would   give  Peking   alter-
natives  in  its  dealings  with  Moscow.    Recognition  of  Peking
at  this  time  would  do  on  a  bigger  and  more  important  scale
what  our  support  of  Tito  did  in  his  struggle  with  Stalin.    The
revolutionary  intransigeance  of  the  Peking  regime  should  not
delude  a  sophisticated   diplomacy.    Those  nations  are   revolu-
tionary  and  intransigeant which  have  nothing  to  lose;  the way
to  tame  the  outlaw  is  to  bring  him  inside  the  family  of  na-
tions.    When  Peking  has  vested  interests  in  peace  and  trade
with  the  capitalist  nations,  it  will  be  less  ready  to  pursue  an
adventurous  policy  in  stirring  up  trouble  within  the   colonial
system.    And  the  ending  of  the  colonial  system,  which  is  in-
evitable,  must  be  done  peacefully  and  gradually  or  it  will  set
off    a  new  world  war.    Let  us  not  forget   that  Mao's   regime
four  years ago  was  more  "revisionist"  than  Khrushchev's.    If
* We  note   with  derision  that   Kennedy  in  his   full   dress
speech  on  Cuba  at  Cincinnati Oct. 6  quoted with  respect   the
testimony  of  our  two  pro-Batista Ambassadors,  Arthur  Card,
ner,  and Earl  Smith before the  Senate  Internal  Security Com-
mittee.
What  Wicked  Ideas  These  Chinese  Spread
"On  16  April,  there  appeared  in  Peiping  an  article
of   great  significance   in  the  magazine  Red  Star  .  .  .
this  same  article  does  not  even  recoil  from  the thought
of   a   world-wide   war,  a   war   fought   with  hydrogen
bombs."
—Ambassador    Wadsworth    at    the   UN,   Oct.   1.
"Many   Americans  believe,   blindly,  than   an  all-out
nuclear   war   would   be   the   end  of   the   world  and  of
civilization.    It  would  be  neither.  .  .  .  We  must  realize
thai  an  all-out  nuclear  attack  would  not  leave  our  na-
tion   uninhabitable.     Radio   activity   decays.  .  .  .  We
could  emerge from  shelters  to  clean  up and rebuild. . . .
New   York's  Governor  Rockefeller  makes  sense   in   his
campaign  for  the  construction of  relatively  cheap home
shelters  (which)  .  .  .  could  save  up to  75 percent  of our
people."
—Dr.  Edward   Teller,  in  This  Week  magazine,  Oct. 9
"Mind   you  radiation  is   not   a  pretty  thing   and,  if
nuclear  war  comes,  it   will  be  no  picnic.    It   is  even
theoretically. possible  that  the  human  race  will  some
day  achieve  the  ability  to  end  its   own  existence  for-
ever.  .  .  .  But  that  day  is  not  here  now. ...  At  a
rough  guess,  in  case  of   a  nuclear  exchange   between
this  country  and  the  Soviet  Union,  the  average Amer-
ican  citizen would  run  about the  same  risk  as  a combat
infantryman   in  Europe  in  the  last  war."
—Stewart   Alsop   in  Readers   Digest   for   October.
"Many   accept  the   idea  that  shelter   can   effectively
reduce  casualties  but  believe  that  survival   in  the  post
attack  environment would be  impossible. ...  A  radio,
active  environment  will  take  its  toll.  This  fact  must not
be  minimized.    But  .  .  .  the  proportion  of  still  born
children  should  be  no  worse  than  30  years   ago.  .  .  .
History  offers  further  evidence  that  a  civilization  can
recover  from   a  devastating  war.    Take,  for  example,
the Thirty  Years'  War. . . .  Entire  districts were  turned
into  deserts,  wolves  ran  in  the  streets   of  once  popu-
lated  cities  .  .  .  cannibalism  was  widespread.    Yet,  in
roughly  50 years...."
—American  Strategy  for  the  Nuclear  Age,  a  newly
published   cold   war   symposium   with  contributions   by
Dean  Acheson,  David  Sarnoff,    Hanson  Baldwin,  J.  Ed-
gar  Hoover,  Herman  Kahn  and  Henry  Kissinger.  See
Pages  331-2, on  "The  Strategic  Role  of   Civil  Defense".
our  diplomacy  was  wise—and  free  from  China  Lobby   influ-
ence—this  is  the  direction  in  which  it  would  move.    To  talk
of  Nationalist  China,  as Nixon  does,  as  an  "area  of   freedom"
is  nonsense.    The  savage  sentence  just  imposed  on  the   pub-
lisher  Lei  Chen  for  having  the  temerity  to  try  and  organize
an  opposition   China  Democratic  party  on  Formosa,  and   the
swift   and   one-sided   character   of   his   kangaroo   court   trial,
is  evidence  of  that.
Who's  Threatening  Whom With  That  H
"World  opinion  was  quite  skeptical  when  a  number  of
prominent  personalities began,  about  two  years  ago,  to  tell
of  conversations  with  Chinese  Communist  leaders,  in  which
those  leaders  said  that  China  could  withstand  a  hydrogen
war  because,  even  after  losing  some 300  million people,  they
would  still  have  300  million  left  who  could  proceed  to  com-
munize  the  world."
—Ambassador  Wadsworth  opposing   China's  admission  to
the  UN,  General  Assembly  Oct.  1
•Bomb  Peking  Does  Not  Even  Possess?
"The  U.S.  representative . . .  knows only  too well  that  the
Chinese  People's  Republic  has  no  nuclear  weapons,  no  hy-
drogen  bombs.   It  is  the  U.S.  that  has  at  its  disposal  these
means  of  mass  destruction. ...  It  is  rather  China  that has
reasons  to  fear  the  danger  of-military  action  on the  part  of
the  U.S. ...  It  is  not  China's  navy  which  is  operating off
the  coast  of  the  U.S. ...  It  is  not  Chinese  military  planes
which  are violating  the  air  space  of  the  U.S.  .  .  ."
—Prime   Minister   Gomulka   (Poland)    replying   Oct.  6
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 17, 1960
Bad  Time  for  Washington  and  Moscow  Not   to  Be  On  Speaking  Terms
U.S.  policy  is  dangerously  rigid.    We  keep  the  door   shut
against  Peking,  thus  denying  ourselves  the  advantages  of  a
divide-and-rule  strategy  in  dealing  with  the  Soviet  bloc.    At
the  same  time  we  treat  Khrushchov  with  hostility,  although
this  might  mean  his  overthrow  by  the   "hards"   inside  the
Kremlin  who  agree  with  Peking  on  the  hopelessness  of  trying
to  co-exist  peacefully   with  the   "imperialist"  powers.     It  is
going  to  be  hard  for  Khrushchov  to  argue  on  his  return  to
Moscow  that  his  ideas  of  peaceful  collaboration  with  capital-
ism  have  been  successful,  and  he  is  going   to  have  to  play
tough   to  maintain   his   own   position.     Coming   events  will
show  how  stupid  was  our  unwillingness  to   let  the  neutral
powers  save  face  all  around  by  "forcing"   a  meeting  between
Elsenhower  and  Khrushchov.   The  symbolic value would  have
been  great,  and  would  have  made  it  easier  for  a  new  adminis-
tration  to  deal  with  the Russians.
Scries  of  Crises Ahead
A  whole  series  of  crises  lies  ahead  which  will  shake  the
UN  and  the  world:  Algeria,  where  Moscow  is  swinging  over
to  a  revolutionary  policy  in  competition  with  Peking;  Berlin,
where  Khrushchov  is  under  pressure  to  show  that  he  can  get
results;  the  Congo,  where  Western  intrigue  has  destroyed  the
fragile   beginnings  of   parliamentary  government.     Africa   is
a  series  of  time  bombs:  Angola,   Rhodesia,  Kenya,  and   the
Union  of  South  Africa.    The  more  one  studies  the  situation
the  more  statesmanlike  appears  to  be  Senator  Mansfield's  re-
cent  speech  suggesting  that  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.   nego-
tiate  a  neutralization  of  the  area  to  facilitate  its  movement
toward   independence.    To  have  the  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.   vir-
tually  not  on  speaking  terms  during  the  months  ahead  is  a
catastrophe.    The  fart  that  Khrushchev's  rudeness  as  well  as
Eisenhower's  laziness  (there  is  really  no  other  word  for  his
indifference   to  the  UN   proceedings)    share  responsibility  is
no  consolation.
Kennedy's   simple-minded   emphasis   on  more  growth  and
more  arms  is  a  very  inadequate   response  to  the   complexities
of  the  changes  taking  place  in  the  world:  the  emergence  of  a
soon-to-be-dominant   neutralist   bloc   in  the  UN,  the   British
Labor  Party's  vote  for  neutralism  and  renunciation  of  nuclear
weapons,  de  Gaulle's  not  so  dissimilar  fight  against, unilateral
atomic  decisions'  by  the  U.S.    Fresh  thinking,   abandonment
of  old  cliches,  are  required  but  nowhere in  evidence.
NOTE:  Because  of  the  Pauling   hearing,  we  were   unable
to  cover  the  historic  argument  in  the  Supreme  Court  on  the
Kennedy  on  Nuclear  Tests  and  Arms
Senator  Kennedy has  always  been  more  friendly  to
what   is  called  "arms   control"  than   to   disarmament.
The  tendency  is  apparent  in  his  letter  to  Thomas  E.
Murray,   who   advocates   resumption   now   of   nuclear
testing  underground  and  in  outer  space.    While  reject-
ing  this  idea  "at  this  time",   Senator  Kennedy  is  am-
biguous.   At  one point  the  Senator  speaks  of  the  world-
wide  hope  of  an  agreement  to  ban  all  tests.    But  in
explaining  what  he  would  do  if   elected,  he  talks  of
seeking  an  agreement  "of  which  limitations   upon  nu-
clear   tests,   weapons   grade  fissionable  material,   bio-
logical  and  chemical warfare  agents  will be  an  essential
and  integral  part."   This  means  acceptance  of  the  idea
of  biological  and  chemical warfare  as  part  of  the  per-
manent  and  legal   arsenal   of  mankind  and  it   implies
limiting  rather   than  abolishing  nuclear  tests.
There  also  seems  implicit in  Senator  Kennedy's  reply
the  idea  of  accepting  the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  to
other   powers.    Thus   he   pledges   himself   to   "invite
leading  nations  having  industrial  capacity  for  produc-
tion  of nuclear  weapons"  to  a  conference to  seek  agree-
ment  "upon  means  of  international  control  of  both  the
production  and  use  of  weapons  grade   fissionable   ma-
terial   and   also   the   production  of  nuclear   weapons."
Again   this   speaks   of  "control"  not   of  agreement   to
prevent  the  spread  of  such  weapons  or  of  their  renun-
ciation.    "Control"  is  the  Pentagon's   hope  because   it
can  open  the  door  to  endless  negotiation   about   arms
quotas,  while  the  arms  race   goes  on.
The  Review  of  the  International   Atomic  Policies  and
Programs  of  the  United  States  just   released   by   the
Joint   Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  reports  that   the
early  hopes  of  cheap  atomic  power  have  fizzled,  and
with  it  the  hope  that  by  spreading  atomic  reactors  for
peaceful  uses  we  could  slow  up  the  nuclear  arms  race.
It  warns,  on  the  contrary,  that  "in  the  absence  of  les-
sened   tensions   and   effective   safeguards,   achievement
of   widespread  atomic  power  could  in  fact   make   the
arms  limitation  problem  more  difficult."    To  "control"
nuclear  arms  in  this  context  may  only  be  to   legalize
and   facilitate   their   spread.    Mr.  Frank   Aiken,   the
Irish   Foreign   Minister,  continuing  his   year-after-year
crusade  at  the  UN  against  the  spread  of  nuclear  wea-
pons,  warned  in  his  speech  on  August  6,  "Every  addi-
tion  to  the  list  of  countries  possessing  nuclear  weapons
increases  the  danger  of  their  use  for  defense,  for  ag-
gression,   for  revenge  or  for  revolution."   This  is  the
perspective  blurred  by  talk  of  limitation  and  control.
trio  of  cases  testing  the  constitutionality   of  the  Smith  Act's
membership  clause  and  of  the  registration  provisions  of   the
Internal  Security  Act.
Origin  and  Progress  of  the  Struggle  to Make the  Congo  Safe  for  Democracy
"Colonel  Mobutu  . . .  once  did a  seven  year  stretch  in the
Congo  army. . . .  After  independence,  Lumumba  .  .  .  made
him  chief  of  staff ...  he  grew  angry  at  Lumumba's whim-
sical  use  of  the  military.  .  .  .  Mobutu  became  a  frequent
visitor  to  the  U.S.  embassy and held  long  talks  with  officials
there.    One  afternoon  last   week,   Mobutu  conferred  with
officers   at   Camp  Leopold,  and  got  their  cheering  support,
That  night  he  went  to  Radio  Congo  and  abruptly announced
that  the  army  was  taking  over."
—Time  Magazine,  Sept. 26
"Reports  from  the  province's  said  many  deputies  and  sen-
ators  of  Lumumba's parliamentary delegation  were  ready  to
withdraw  their  support.    Some  30  pro-Lumumba  deputies
and  senators  have  already  defected,   and  Mobutu  was   re-
ported  ready  to  authorize the  reopening  of  Parliament  if  an
anti-Lumumba  majority  was  assured."
—Reuters,  in  Washington Post,  Oct.  8
"The  loyalty  of  many political  leaders  to  Mr.  Lumumba—
particularly  in  the  interior—continued  to  impede reconstruc-
tion   efforts   of   the   government   commission   installed  by.
Army  Leader Col.  Joseph  Mobutu.  The  commission's  spokes-
man,   Albert  Bolela,   told  a  news  conference   the   Congo's
political  leaders  'are  not  sufficiently  mature to  make  a  syn-
thesis   of   western   democratic  institutions   and  the   tribal
realities  of  the  Congo'."
—AP  from  Leopoldsville,  Washington  Star, Oct. 9
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  October  17,  I960
Abrams,  Attacked  by  Dodd,  Was
(Continued   from  Page   One)
Kamen  had  been  cleared  of  these  charges  and  won  a  libel  suit
against  a  Chicago   newspaper   which  printed   them.     Perhaps
all  these  questions  were  designed  to  distract  attention   from
the  failure  of  the  Chairman  to  take  any  action  toward  a  con-
tempt  citation  after  Dr.  Pauling's  refusal  to  furnish  the  names
he had  been  ordered  to  bring.    When  the  long hearing  ended,
Senator  Dodd  said  such  action  was  up  to  the  committee.
Nixon  Would  Be  Put  on  the   Spot
This  hesitation  may have  more  than  one  explanation.     Dr.
Pauling's   application   for  a  review  in  the  Supreme  Court  of
his  action  to  enjoin  the  committee  is  still  pending   before  it.
Failure  to  cite him  for  contempt  would  moot  it.   Then,  again,
with  the  Senate  out  of  session,  Richard  Nixon  would  have  to
sign  and  transmit  it  to  the  U.S.  Attorney  if  it  were  voted  by
the  committee;  this  would  make  him  look  too   uncomfortably
like  the  old  Nixon.   Dodd  may fear  a  defeat  at  the  hands  of
his own  committee if  he  asks for  a  contempt  citation;  no  other
Senator  even  showed  up  for  the  hearing—perhaps  they  see  no
mileage  in  pillorying  a  world  famous  scientist  on  so  popular
an  issue as cessation  of  testing.    Finally,  considering  the  Wat-
kins  .decision,  Dr.   Pauling's   denial   of   communism  and   his
ready  answer  to  all  other   questions,   it  is  doubtful   whether
a  contempt  conviction  would   hold   up  on  appeal.     Unfortu-
nately  Senator  Dodd's   larger  objective  does  not  require  Dr.
Pauling's  conviction.    His  larger  objective  is  to  destroy  the
National  Committee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy,  and  to  make
people  fearful  of  speaking  up  against  nuclear  testing  and  for
disarmament  lest  they  find  themselves  "controversial"  or  per-
haps  worse.    His  attack  on  the  Committee  on  the  eve  of  its
Madison  Square  Garden  meeting  last  May  has  already  started
a  disruptive chain  reaction  within  the  organization.
The  day  after  the  Pauling  hearing,  as  if  to  link  him  more
closely,  the  committee  released  a  pamphlet   called   "Commu-
nist  Infiltration   in  the  Nuclear  Test  Ban  Movement"   which
contains  the  transcript  of  the  executive  hearing  last  May  13
which  threw  the  nuclear  policy  committee  into  a  panic.    The
witness  was  Henry  H.  Abrams,  a  New  York  City  accountant,
who   had   been   active  in   organizing   the   Garden   meeting.
Also  Attacked  in  Sunday  Worker
He  Dared  Disagree  With  the   President
"We  then  moved  on  to  the  Fair  Play  for   Cuba  ad-
vertisement.  .  .  .  Had I  received  money  for  signing  the
ad?    No.    Was  it  paid  for  by  Cuban  gold?  .  .  .  Was  I
aware  that   President  Eisenhower  had  made  a  speech
in  which  he  stated that the  Castro regime was  a menace
to  the  stability of  the  Western  hemisphere?    No,  I  was
not.    And  did  I  think  myself  justified  in  holding  opin-
ions   that   openly   defied   those   of   the   President?     I
brooded  over  this  for  a  long  incredulous  moment,  and
then  replied  that  I  was  English,  and  that  I  had  been
forming   opinions  all  my  life  without  worrying  for  a
second  whether or  not  they  coincided with  those  of  the
President   of   the   United  States.     Had   my  wits  been
active  enough,  I  might  have  pointed  out  that  Senator
Dodd   himself,   as   a   Democrat,   must  have  sometimes
have  found  himself  in  the  heretical  position  of  having
to  defy  President  Eisenhower."
—Kenneth  Tynan  in  Harpers  for  October  describing
his  own  ordeal  before   the  Internal  Security    Committee.
Mr.  Tynan,  the  distinguished   theatre  critic  of  the  Lon-
don  Observer  was  then guest  critic  on  The New  Yorker.
This   release   for   the  first   time   enables   one   to   judge   how
much  fire  there  was  behind  all  that  smoke.    A  careful  read-
ing  shows   nothing   discreditable  to  Mr.   Abrams  except  that
he   took   the   Fifth  amendment   on   his  political  associations.
One  can  infer  from  this  that  he  was  a  party  member.    But  it
would  seem  from  the  committee's  own  evidence  that  he  no
longer  is.    Indeed  the  document  reprinted  by  the  Senate  com-
mittee  on  pages  16  and  17  seems  to  indicate  that  while   Mr.
Abrams  is  being  pilloried  as  a  communist  boring-from-within
the  nuclear  policy  movement,  he  was  criticized  in  the  Sunday
Worker  two  years  ago  by  the  Communist  Benjamin  J.  Davis
for  fostering  Trotzkyites  boring  from  within  in  an   Indepen-
dent  Socialist movement  Mr.  Abrams  helped  to  launch.    Mr.
Abrams'  connections  with  the  Communist  party,  like  his  im-
portance  in  the  nuclear  policy  committee,  seem  to  have  been
exaggerated  by the  Senate  committee.    Perhaps  the  availability
now  of  the  actual  hearing  record  will  make  it  possible  more
coolly   to   reconsider  his  hasty  suspension   without  trial   last
May  and  to  end  any  tendency  to  truckle  to  Senator  Dodd.
Please  Renew  Early   and   Help   Us  If   You   Can  By  Adding   A   Gift    Sub
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Street   ............
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
3  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.........................Zone............State....................
10/17/60
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4 (1  yr.)   additional:
.........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?         Yes O    No  D
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered
listed  every  Thursday
AD  independent
$6  in  the   U.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED