I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960may16.pdf

============================================================

Ike Jumps  the  Gun  on  Testing,  P.  3
Two  U.S.  Army  Publications Say  Russians  Do  Not  Believe  in  Efficacy  of  Surprise  Attack,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  19
MAY  16,  1960
'»'     WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
Not  As Open  A  Society  As We're  Cracked  Up  to Be
On   the   eve  of   the   summit  conference,  the   case  of   the
U-2   and   its   aftermath   have   demonstrated   that   the   Soviet
Union   is  a  good   deal   less   closed   and   the  United   States  a
good   deal  less  open   a  society  than  we  had   supposed.    For
four  years  our  reconnaissance planes  have  been  photographing
Soviet  defense  installations  with  impunity,  except  for  a  dozen
or  so  incidents  in  which  planes  have  been  shot  down.    But
for   the  accident  which  enabled  the  Russians  to  capture  the
pilot  in  this  latest  affair,   our  government   would   have  gone
on  lying  to  us  about  the  shooting  down  of  unarmed civilian
planes   innocently   blundering   across   Soviet   borders   while
studying  the  weather.    As  this  is  being  written  Mr.  Eisen-
hower   has  just  told   his   press   conference,   "Open   societies,
in  the  days  of  present  weapons,  are  the  only  answer."   In  the
days   of   present   weapons,   when   invasion   of   an   opposing
country's  skies  may  trigger   off  disaster,  striving  for   an  open
society  should  begin  at  home.    It  looks  as  if  we  have  clearer
pictures  of  Russian  bases  than  we  do  of  the  CIA.
How  Incidents Lead  to Wars
There  seem  to  be  no  deterrents  against  the  CIA  as  there
are  against  the  Russians.    If  only  the  incident  created  proves
serious   enough,   the   CIA   can  be  sure   that   Congress   will
"close  ranks"  and  tamp  down  criticism  in  order  to   "strength-
en"   the  President.     This  is  how  incidents  create  wars.     It
becomes   a  point  of  honor   "not   to  back  down."    The   last
few  days  in  Congress  have  again  shown  how  quickly  sobriety
evaporates  in  these  brink-of-war  situations.    On  Friday,  May
6,  Lyndon  Johnson  was  still  ready  to  talk  sensibly.    "Premier
Khrushchov,"  the  majority  leader  told  the  Senate,  "may  well
have  thought  the  flight  of  a  plane  was  a  deliberate intrusion
on  our  part.    If  that  were  even  a  remote  possibility,"   John-
son  added,  "we,  too,  should  be  taken  to  task  for  allowing  it
just  before  the  summit  meeting,  or  at  any  other  time."   But
four  days  later  when  it  was  clear  that  CIA  had  indeed   been
guilty,   of   this   "remote   possibility,"    Johnson    attacked   not
the  CIA  but  the  Russians.   Johnson  told  the  Senate  Tuesday,
May  10,  in  a  speech  which  brought  him  a  warm  handshake
from  Nixon,  that  he  wanted   Khrushchov   to  know  that  he
could  not  "use  this  incident  in  such  a  way  as  to  divide  the
American  people,"  divide  them,  that  is,  from   Allen  Dulles.
When   Javits   of   New   York   hailed   this   as   statesmanship,
Johnson  modestly  insisted  "I  merely  said  that  America  must
be all for  one and  one  for  all."  Why,  when  one's  country  most
needs  clear  thinking,  is fatuity  considered  patriotism ?
Four  years  ago  the  Hoover  Commission  recommended  that
Congress  establish  a  "watchdog"  committee  to  supervise  CIA
activities,  but  at  the  very  moment   of  CIA's  greatest   boner
criticism  of  it  was  stifled.    Even  Mansfield  of  Montana,  who
The Few  in Congress  Who  Protested
"This  incident  or  any  other  of  this  kind  might  well
have  accidentally  set  off  the  holocaust  of  nuclear con-
flict  which   we  have  been  striving   at   great  cost   and
sacrifice   to  prevent."
—Mansfield   (D.  Mont)  in  the  Senate  May  9.
"It  was  not  only  a  tragic  blunder  of  trying  to  send
a  plane  across  the  continent  of  Russia,  but  in  violat-
ing   the  neutrality   of   two   friendly   nations."
—Robertson  (D.  Va)  in  the  Senate  May  9.
"I  find  it  difficult  to  close  ranks behind  the  President
in   the   case   of   an   accident   about   which   the   State
Department    and   the    administration    say    he    Knew
nothing. ...  If  he   [the   President]   did  not—I  say
that   that   fact   is   a  worse  indictment  than  if   he  had
knowledge   of   it   and  had  approved   it."
—McCarthy   (D.  Minn)   in  the  Senate  May  9.
"Mr.  Speaker,  I  am  distressed  that  there  are  public
officials  who  in  this  hour preceding a  world  conference
of   heads  of  State  would  seek   to  justify   or   condone
provocative  acts  which  threaten  the  lives  of  hundreds
of   millions  of   people  the   world  over."
—Byron  Johnson  (D.  Col)  in  the  House  May  10.
has  for  years  been  calling  for   some  control   over   CIA,   did
not  mention  it  by  name  when  he  charged  in  the  Senate  on
Monday,  May  9,  that  there  was  need  to  correct  the   "danger-
ous  flaws"  in  the   executive  branch  of   the  government   that
create  "incidents  of  this  kind."    Zablocki  (D.   Wis.)   called
on  the  House  Rules  committee  to  report  out  his  HJ  Res.  31
for   the   establishment  of   a   Joint   Congressional    Committee
on   Intelligence  Matters,   but  there  was  no  echo  of  support
in  the  House.    The  liberals  were  numb.    As  of  Wednesday
morning,  only  three  Senators  and  one  Congressman   (see  box
this  page)   had   joined   Zablocki  in  criticism  of  the   "tragic
blunder."    Even  the  Hearst  press  criticized  the Administration
for   allowing   so  dangerous   a  flight  just  before  the   summit
meeting  but   in  Congress  few  dared  say  this  on   the  floor.
Only   Robertson   of   Virginia,   a   conservative   who   can   get
"away  with  it,  stated  angrily  Monday  that  neither  he  nor  any
other   member   of   the   select   Appropriations    subcommittee
which  has  for  13  years  passed  on  the  hush-hush  CIA  budget
had  ever  heard  that  it  operated   planes.
How  the  Spies  Swarmed at  Oak Ridge
The  Robertson  statement  makes  it  difficult   to  take  at  face
value  the  cover-up  speech  in  the  House  next  day  by  Cannon,
chairman   of   the   House   Appropriations    Committee.       "Al-
though   the  Members   of  the  House  have  not  generally   been
informed   on  the  subject,"   Cannon   said,   "the   mission   was
one  of   a  series  and  part  of   an   established   program   with
which  the  subcommittee  in  charge  of  the  program  was  famil-
(Contmued  on  Page  Four)
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  May  16, 1960
Official  Analysis  of  Soviet  Military  Strategy  Embarrassing  to  State Department
U.S.  Army Publication Says Khrushchov Does Not  Believe in Surprise Attack
The  State   Department    excused   espionage   flights    over
Soviet  territory   as  -necessary   to  allay  "apprehension   over
surprise   attack."   A  few  days   earlier,  the  U.S.  Army  In-
formation   Digest  (June  issue)  published  an  article,  "Soviet
Attitudes   on  the   Use  of   Military   Power"   which   reports
that  Soviet  military   doctrine  under  Khrushchov   (as   under
Stalin)  holds  to  the  view  that  surprise  attack  cannot  win  a
war.   Here  are  the  relevant   excerpts:
"The   men  in  the  Kremlin,  despite  their  ideological  frame-
work,  are  practical  observers  of  the  world  scene  and  base  their
decisions  in  the  final  analysis  on  what  they  calculate  to  be  the
relative  distribution  of  political,  economic  and  military  power.
They  appreciate  fully  the  destructiveness  of  nuclear  weapons,
and  while  seemingly   assured  of  their  own  strength   evidently
realize  that  the  U.S.S.R.   could  not  escape  damaging   counter
blows  in  a  war  with  the  United  States.   This  was  forthrightly
acknowledged   in  Khrushchev's  14 January  speech.  The  Soviet
leader,  although   claiming  that  the  West  'would  suffer  incom-
parably  more'  in  event  of  a new world  war,  made  the  unprece-
dented  admission  for  him  that  the  U.S.S.R.  also  'would   suffer
great  casualties.'
Even  Missiles Do Not  Change  the  Picture
"In  this  connection,  the  Premier  restated  caution  on  the  de-
cisiveness  of  surprise  in  modern  war,  a feature  of  military  doc-
trine  to  which  the  Soviets  have  devoted  increased  prominence
in  recent  years.    Khrushchov   declared  that  the  factor   of  sur-
Miscalculation the  Real Danger
A    leading   British   authority   on   Soviet    military
strategy,   writing  in   the   newly   published  May  issue
of   Army,   the   organ   of   the   Association  of   the   U.S.
Army,   also  says   "there   is   no  evidence   from   Soviet
sources   that    Moscow   is   considering   a   nuclear  pre-
ventive  war."    Discussing  "Soviet  Strategy  in  World
War   III,"   Malcolm   Mackintosh  thinks   it   would   be
more   likely   to   break   out   from   miscalculation.   Mr.
Mackintosh  came  to  this  country in  January  to  lecture
before  the  Air  War  College.
prise  attack  with   even   such  formidable  weapons   as  missiles
would  not  achieve victory  for  the  attacker.   Although  granting
that  surprise  held  certain  advantages,  he  noted  that  it  would
not  enable  the  aggressor  'to  put  out  of  order  immediately  all
the  stocks  of  nuclear  weapons,  all  the  rocket  installations  lo-
cated  on  the  territory  of  the  power  attacked.'
"Khrushchev's  remarks are  indicative  of  a  strategy  aimed  at
deterring  the  West,  but  they  are  also  an  avowal  that  the  Soviet
Union  is  itself  deterred  from  courses  of  action  that  run  risks
of  general  war.  .  .  .  Moscow  does  not  appear  to  be undertak-
ing  the  extremely  expensive  task  of  developing  militaiy  might
capable  of  eliminating  by a  first  strike  the  ability  of  the  West
to  retaliate.   Soviet  leaders  evidently  consider  it  more  essential
to  their  longer  range  power  position  to  fulfill  their  ambitious
economic programs.  . . ."
Meyer  and  Kastenmeier Challenge  Preventive War  Doctrine in  Defense  Budget Debate
Two   Democratic  members  of   Congress,   Meyer  of   Ver-
mont,   and  Kastenmeier  of   Wisconsin,   rose   in   the   House
May   5  during  debate  on  the  defense  budget  to   challenge
the  doctrine  of   pre-emptive  war  set   forth  by   the   House
Appropriations   Committee   in   reporting   the   budget   bill.
That  report,   as  discussed  in  our  last  week's   issue,   called
for  the  U.S.  to  strike  first  "should  it  ever  become  obvious
that   an  attack  upon  us  or  our  allies  is   imminent."   Mr.
Meyer  called  attention  to  this,  and  to  the  colloquy  on  "pre-
ventive  war"  at  page  73  of  Part   7  of   the  appropriations
hearings  between  Mr.  Mahon   of   Texas,   chairman  of   the
defense   subcommittee,   and   General  Power,   head   of   the
Strategic   Air   Command.     In   this,   Mr.   Mahon  said   we
ough  to  stop  "all  of  this  big  talk"  that  we  would  "under
no  circumstances  more  or  less  start   a  war,"  so   that   we
could  keep  our  opponent  "on  tenterhooks."
Mr.  Mahon  (p.  8921  Cong.  Rec.  May  5)  said  the  defense
subcommittee   which  wrote  the   report   had  no   desire   "to
endorse  a  policy  of  preventive war  or  so-called  pre-emptive
war."    But,"  he  added,  "we  do  not  want  to  give  the  oppo-
nent  complete  assurance  that  we  will  sit   by  with  folded
hands  and  submit  to  destruction  without  raising  a  finger
in   our   defense."     Mr.   Mahon  nevertheless    assured   Mr.
Meyer   there   was   "no   intention   whatever   of    preventive
war.    That  is  contrary  to  our  national  policy."    Then  Mr.
Meyer  read  the  passage   in  the  defense   bill  report   about
"pre-emptive  war"  and  asked  "who  would  decide  an  attack
is  imminent?    To  me  that  is  an  enunciation  of  the  prin-
ciple   of   pre-emptive  war."    To  this   Mr.  Mahon  made  a
reply  which  we  believe  to  be  disingenuous.   Here  it  is:
"If   an  attack  is  made  on  us  by   manned  bombers,"  Mr.
Mahon  said,  "those   bombers   would  have  to  be  in  the  air
for   a   period  of   hours  before   this   country  could  be   hit.
We  have   radar  screens   and  early   warning   lines  as   well
as   information  overseas  in   regard   to   what   is   going  on
in  the   world.    If  it   becomes   obvious  an  attack   is  being
launched  or  is   in   the   process   of  being  launched  on   this
country,  certainly  we  have  the  right  and  plan,  I  hope,   to
have   our  bombers  in   the   air.    They   can   be   recalled   if
necessary.    We  do  not  want  to  have  them  on  the  ground
subject   to  destruction  by   an  opposing   force.     This   is   a
matter  of  being  on  the  alert."
At  this  point  Mr.  Meyer's  time  was  cut  off.   One  would
have   to   be   naive  to   believe  that   Mr.  Mahon  was   only
talking   about   an   alert   when   he   spoke   of   striking   first,
and  he  never  did  explain  his  colloquy with  General  Power.
We  hope  the  issue  will  be  discussed  more  adequately  when
the  Senate   takes   up  the   defense  budget.    After   the  de-
fense   budget   was   voted  with   only   three   nays   (Harmon,
Ind.;   Hechler,   W.Va.,   and  Johnson,   Col.,   all  Democrats),
Mr.  Kastenmeier  made  a  short  but  able  speech   (p.  8957)
in   which  he   quoted  the   pre-emptive  war   section    oli   the
Mahon   report  and  said:
"The   suggestion    here   made,   from   which   I   absolutely
disassociate   myself,  is  the  suggestion   that  we  must   con-
template   striking   first.   It   is   dangerous   in  the   extreme
since   it   would   lead   to   the   situation   most   frighteningly
conducive  to  accidental  war,  the  situation  when  each   side
has  the  safety  catch  off  and  is  fingering  a  hair   trigger.
"That   trigger,   as   we   all   know,   will  set   off   dozens   of
thermonuclear  missiles   not   merely   an  old-fashioned   rifle.
The   deterrent  has   always  before   been   considered   to   be
the   ability   to   strike   second   with   power   so   frightening
that  it  would  deter  anyone  from  striking   first.    Some   of
us  now  seem  to  have  moved  so  far  on  this  deterrent  road
that  the  'deterrent'  is  seen  as  the  first  strike.    This   shift
is  clear  evidence  that  the  road  is  the  wrong  road.   A  form
of   defense  that  would  result   in  universal  annihilation   is
clearly  no  defense  and  from  this  point  on  it  must  be  clear
to  us  all  that  the  pursuit  of  universal  disarmament  is  the
only  real   defense."
These  were  the  wisest  words  of  the  whole  debate.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  16, 1960
Why  Did  Ike  Have  to  Jump the  Gun on  Test  Resumption  While  Talks  Still  Going On?
Why  Pentagon and AEC Do Not Want Joint Research on Nuclear Detection
Mr.   Eisenhower's  announcement  that  we  would   soon  re-
sume underground testing  for  detection  improvement  threw  up
another  obstacle to  agreement at Geneva.   U.S.  agencies  do  not
want  joint  research  on  test  detection,  to  which  the  Russians
have  agreed.   The  U.S.  agencies want  what  they  call  "coordi-
nated"  research, in  which  each  nation  does  it  own  and  allows
limited  observation  by  others.    The   reason  was  disclosed  by
Gerald  W. Johnson,  assistant director of  Livermore laboratory,
in  his  testimony  before  the  recent hearings on  a  test  agreement
held  by the  Joint  Committee on  Atomic  Energy.  Johnson  said
the  Russians wanted joint research  in  test  detection  and  peace-
time  uses  done  on  the  basis  of  "systems which  we  opened  up
completely",   i.e.  no  secret  devices  would  be  used.    Johnson
said  we preferred  to  use  "our  more  advanced  systems",  i.e.  of
nuclear  explosives,  and  added  "these  are  just  the  systems  that
we  would  not  want  to  reveal."   "These  are  just  the  systems,"
Chairman  Holifield  commented,  "that  would  give  us  more  in-
formation   in  weapons  technology."    To   which   Johnson   re-
plied,  "Absolutely."   In  other  words we  could  use  experiments
for  "peacetime  uses"  and  "detection  improvement"  as  a means
of   testing   for   new   weapons   devices.     This   explains  why
Hagerty,  as  the  New   York  Times  reported  cryptically  May  8,
"seemed   not  to  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  knowledge
gained  might  have  military  applicability."
Tricky   Misrepresentation
What  will  most  anger  the  Russians in  the  Eisenhower  state-
ment  is  that  it  said  that  at  Geneva  they  "concurred"  in  the
proposal   that  nuclear  underground   tests  be  resumed   to  im-
prove  means of  detection.   The  Russians argued  that  chemical
explosions  were  adequate.   Many  thoughtful   U.S.   scientists
disagree.   The  Russians  gave  in  reluctantly,  but  on  the  sup-
position  that  nuclear  tests would  be non-secret  and  under  joint
auspices.   It  is  true  that  the  President's  statement  still  leaves
open  the  question  of  "the  areas  in  which  coordinated  or  joint
research  would  be  most  fruitful"   but  it  took  by  surprise  even
our  own  negotiators waiting in  Geneva  for  talks  to  resume  on
May  11.   Why  was  it  necessary to  jump  the  gun  and  issue  a
unilateral  statement  on  May 7?   The  Pentagon  and  the  AEC
dragged  their  heels  for  many  months  before  doing  anything
about  the  Berkner  panel  recommendations  for  improved   de-
tection  methods.  Now  it  looks  as  if  they  are  acting  quickly  to
head  off joint research and  poison  the  atmosphere  of  the  talks.
The  "summary"  released  by the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic
Dr.  Hans  Bethe's  Warning
"The  Russians  have  got  the  impression—and  I  think
rightly—that  whenever  one  demand  has  been  fulfilled
[in   the   nuclear   testing   talks   at   Geneva],   we   make
another.   They   have   got   the   impression   that   we  are
never   satisfied.    This   is   exactly   the   impression   that
we  got  in  the  Baruch  negotiations,  in  the  negotiations
directly  after  the  war,  about  the  international   control
of   atomic  energy  in  general.   We  got   the  impression
that  it   is  impossible   to  negotiate   with  the  Russians.
I   think—and  I  don't  know  because   I  don't   know   the
minds  of  the  Russians   well  enough—I  think  they  are
rapidly   getting   the   impression   that   we  are  now  im-
possible   to   negotiate   with;   that   it   is   impossible   to
get  an  agreement  which  is  satisfactory   to  us,  because
we   insist   on  a   hundred  percent  security   in   a  world
where  there   is  no  such   security.
"We  must  watch  out  very  carefully  lest  the  peaceful
Russian  approach  which  has  been  brought   in  by  Mr.
Khrushchov  be  replaced  by  a  more  violent   line,   such
as  that  of  Stalin.   And  I  do  not  know  where  our  hun-
dred   percent   security   would   be   if   that    happened."
—Dr.  Hans  Bethe,  speech  at  the  Washington   Philo-
sophical   Society   April   25,  from   textual   excerpt    put
in  Congressional  Record  May  4  by  Senator  Proximire.
Energy  last  Monday  on  its  test  agreement  hearings  ran  true  to
expectation,  stressing the  negative.  Its  conclusion  that  "for  the
next  several years at  least"  it will  not  be possible  "to  identify"
underground  shots  below  19  kilotons  "although   they  may  be
detected"  is question-begging.  The  Berkner  panel  said  a  three
year  program  was  needed  to  restore  the  full  effectiveness  of
the   180-station  system  agreed  upon  at  Geneva  in   1958.    A
minority  report,  if  the  Committee  were  not  lined  up  solid  on
the  AEC-Pentagon  side,  would  stress  that  within  a  few  years
a  greatly  improved  detection  capacity  was  expected  and  that
event  now  an  attempt  to  cheat  would  be  dangerous  because
even  small  shots  can  be  detected  at  great  distances.
The  only thing  new in the  report was its  reference to  a  sup-
plementary   memorandum  by  Dr.   Hans   A.   Bethe  revising
downward  from  600  to  200  the  number  of  unmanned  stations
in  the  Soviet Union  required  to  monitor  even  20 kiloton  (20,-
000  tons)  shots  decoupled  by  a  factor  of  300  to  look  like  a
mere  70  tons.   The  Committee  said  the  text  would  be  pub-
lished  with  the  hearings  in  June  but  Senator  Proxmire  put  it
in  the  Congressional  Records May 4 where  it  appears  at  pages
8689-90.   It  is must  reading.
How  the  News  About  Those  Police  Clashes  With  Refugees  in  Berlin  Was  Faked
THE  BERLIN STORY: UPI  [United  Press   International]
had  a  series   of   dispatches  from   Berlin  this   week  telling
about  East  German  police  invading  West  Berlin  'in  a  des-
perate   effort   to  effort   a  sudden  mass   flight   of   refugees,'
and   clashing   with  West   Berlin   police   in   their   hunt   for
fugitive  East  Germans  on  the  elevated  railway.    Oh  their
face,   the  stories   told  of   a  critical  situation.    AP   [Asso-
ciated  Press]  reported  the  police  incident  and  the   refugee
situation   separately.    We  did  not   connect   them   because
(1)   no  responsible  source,  official  or  press,  saw  a  link  and
(2)   staff   observations  at  border  points  did  not  show   any
unusual   activity   by   Communist   police.
"Communist   police   come   into   West   Berlin   every   day,
hundreds  of   them,   to  supervise  operation  of  the  elevator,
which  is   East   Germany's  responsibility.     There  is  a  run-
ning  quarrel  between  East  and  West  forces  over  authority
on  elevated  station   platforms;   the  arrest   of   a  couple  of
East   German  officers   for   being   out   of   bounds   was   part
of  that  quarrel.    There  were  no  reports  of  refugees   being
molested  or  intimidated,  and  West   Berlin  police  are  con-
stantly  on  the  alert   for  such  action.     As  to  the   refugee
flow,  there   always   is   an  upsurge   at   Easter—Communist
officials   are  less  vigilant   then—and  it's   a  human  impulse
to  travel  in  springtime.    The  jump  was  larger   than   usual
this   year,   because   of   the   land   collectivization    campaign
in  East  Germany,  but  it  since  has  dwindled  to  little  more
than  average."
—AP  Log, Associated Press  weekly, April  21-27.
7  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  16, 1960
Maybe  Ike's  Unwelcome  Because  It's  Moscow  That  Fears  A  Pearl  Harbor
{Continued  from  Page  One)
iar,  and  of  which  it  had  been  fully  apprised  during  this  and
previous   sessions."     Cannon   tried   to   excuse  this   operation
by  painting   a  picture   of   Soviet   espionage   in   this   country
so  extensive  as  almost  to  create  a  housing  problem.    "When
we  were  at  Oak  Ridge,"  Cannon  told  the  House,  "we  were
told   there  were  so  many  Russian  spies   there   that   only  by
a  policy  of  strictest compartmentalism  were  they  able  to  main-
tain  the  integrity  of  their  work."    In  his  peroration,   Cannon
dwelt  on  "the  most  gratifying  feature  of  the  entire  incident."
"The   world   has   always   recognized   the   remarkable   success
of   our  form  of  government,"    Cannon   ended   triumphantly.
"But  they  have  said  that  it  was  at  a  great   disadvantage  in
a  war  with   an  authoritarian   dictatorship.    We   have  here
demonstrated   conclusively  that   free   men  confronted   by  tha
most  ruthless  and  criminal  despotism  can  under  the  Consti-
tution  of  the  United  States  protect  this  nation  and  preserve
world  civilization,"  i.e.  we  can  be  just  as  deceitful.
Bipartisan   Brainwash
With   Johnson's   speech   in   the   Senate  and' Cannon's  in
the  House  last  Tuesday  the  Southern  conservative  leadership
had  lined  the  Democratic  party  up  with  the  Republican  in
a  bipartisan  brainwashing  operation.     Its  purpose  is  to  con-
vince   the   American   people   that   secret   overflights  are   no
different   from   ordinary  espionage,   and   indeed   constitute   a
kind  of  benevolent  operation  to  save  the  world   from   being
confronted   by  a. choice,  as  the  State  Department   said  in  its
May   9   release,   between   "abject   surrender  or   nuclear   de-
struction."     Madison  Avenue  has  never  tried  to  sell  a  bigger
whopper,   though  the  President  himself  let  a  little  wind  out
of   the  bag  by  admitting  at  press  conference  that  there  was
no' evidence  of  Russian reconnaissance flights  over  our  country.
A  somewhat  contradictory  line  is  also  being  peddled   to  the
effect   that   the   overflights  have   been   a   public   benefit  by
proving  that  the  Russians  aren't  so  well  prepared   after   all.
Joseph  Alsop,  who  proved  by  arithmetic  only  a  few  months
ago  that  Russia  could  wipe  out  all  our  bases  at  home  and
abroad   in   one   foul   blow,   now   proclaims   them   virtually
helpless  to  counter  American  attack  from  the  air.    Even  for
so  gifted  a  whirling   dervish,   that  is  quite  a  turn.
The Trigger-Happy  Mentality
The World  Fears
"'By   all   odds,'   said   Maj.  Gen.  David   Wado,   the
[Vandenberg  ICBM]  Base  Commander,'  the   mosit   im-
portant  aspect  of  Vandenberg's  mission  is  its  growing
ability   to   launch   in  anger  and  on  a  very  few  min-
utes  notice.'"
—"Missile    City   Ready    to   Fight,"    dispatch    from
Vandenberg   Air  Force  Base,  Washington  Post,  May  8
by  John  G.  Norris,   one  of   the  hundred  newsmen  and
associate  members  of  the  Aviation  Writers   Association
who   toured   this,   the   first   operational   ICBM    base.
The  truth  is  (see  documents  on  page  two)   that  the  Rus-
sians  do  not  believe  in  the  possibility  of  winning  a. war  by
surprise  attack—after  all  Hitler  failed  in  his  surprise  attack
on  them  and  the  Japanese  in  their  surprise  attack  on  us—.
nor  do  they  have  the  military  means  even  if  they  were  mad
enough   to  try.    To   save   themselves   from   retaliation,  they
would  have  to  hit  our  bases  round  the  world  and  open  war
on  half  the  globe,  dousing  the  northern  hemisphere  with  so
much   fallout  as  possibly   to   endanger   themselves   as   well.
This   fixation   about  surprise  attack  is  a  psychosis   nurtured
by   the   Air   Force  which  still  believes   in  the   possibility  of
pushbutton  victory  by  airpower.    The   Air  Force  is  wedded
to  a  counter-force  strategy,  that  is  to  building  up  the  means
to  strike  first  and  wage  preventive  or  pre-emptive  war.   But
this  it  cannot  do  without  knowing  the  location  of  Russia's
retaliatory  bases  which  would  have  to  be  wiped  out  in   the
first  blow.     Taber   of   New   York   indicated   this   when   he
told  the  House  naively  last  Tuesday  that  while  Khmshchov
knows  "he  could  not  overcome  the  U.S.  with  the  airplanes
and  missiles we have  available,"  on  the  other  hand  "we  could
not  know  what  the  proper  targets  were  or  know  where  they
would  be unless we had  some means of  checking up  on  them—
and  he  left  us  no  course  to  pursue  except  the  course  that
we  did  pursue."     In  other  words,  while  Mr.  K.   dare  not
attack   us,   we   can't   attack  him   until   we  know   where   his
bases  are.    If  we  had  our  missiles  trained  on  his  bases,  we
could  be "tougher"  at  the  bargaining  table.  Maybe the  unwel-
come  signs  are  going  up  for  Ike  in  Moscow  because  the  Rus-
• sians  fear, it  is  we  who  may  be  planning  a  Pearl  Harbor.
The  1959   Index   Is  Ready  and  You  Can  Get  A  Free  Copy   If  You  Send  A  Stamped   Self-Addressed    Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ................................................................... _ .................
Street
City    .......«...............................Zone..._.......State...................
5/16/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  .............................................................. ———••—
Street   ........................................................... _ ........................
City    ...............«.......................Zone............State.« — ..:....~...
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/. F. Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraskd  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  cis
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub
llshed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington   15  D   C
AD   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   .1.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription •
Si  In  the    TJ.  S.;  S6  In  Canada;  SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  S15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED