I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960sep26.pdf

============================================================

How  Africa   Sees  the  Congo  Crisis,  Pps. 2-3
Must  Reading:  The  Bloc  Which  Now  Holds  the  Balance Speaks  Through  Ghana  at  the  UN,  See  Pps.  2-3
I. K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VIII,  NO.  34
SEPTEMBER   26,   1960
101
    WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Imagine  Lumumba  Partners  With   Rockefeller
United  Nations.  N.Y.,   Sept.  20
The  United  Nations  is  flooded  with  reporters,  and  the  re-
porters  are flooded with  documents,  but  nobody  seems  to  know
what  is really  going  on.    Major  areas  of  activity  in  the  Congo
crisis  manage  to  stay  hidden   behind  curtains  few  can   pene-
trate.    In  the  United  Nations,  as  in  our  own  Congress,   much
of  the  essential bargaining is  done  in  lobbies,  offices  and  com-
mittee  rooms, never recorded and  rarely reported.   The  formal
resolutions  which  emerge  bear  only  a  distant  resemblance  to
the  pulsating  reality.   A  prime unanswered question  here,  for
example,  is  what  price  was  paid  the   African-Asian   bloc  for
saving  Mr.   Hammarskjold  from   the  Russians  at  the  special
emergency  session  just  ended.    Another  area  in  which  little
is  known  covers  the  activities  of  those  powerful  financial  in-
terests  in  Brussels, London  and  New  York  which  have  a  rich
stake  in  Katanga  and  do  not  intend  to  allow  it  to  be  over-
whelmed  by  Russian  ambition  and   African   insurgency.     The
U.S.  press  treats  the  private  interests  in  the  Congo  question
as  Mid-Victorian  English  novelists   treated  sex,  as   something
nice  people   don't   talk  about.    With  us,  the  bedroom   is  no
longer  sacred  but  the  board  room  is.    Newspapers  which  pry
into  all  sorts  of  personal  intimacies  stop  short  as  if  by  taboo
at  the  panelled  doors  of  the  executive  suites  of  Rockefeller
Center  and  Wall   Street.     Yet  what   good   clean  journalistic
fun   it  would  be  to  know  what  the  Rockefeller  interests—not
without   connections  in   government—are   doing  behind   the
scenes  to  stall   off   the   dreadful   possibility   that  Patrice  Lu-
mumba  might  show  up  one  of  these  days  in  one  of  their  best
board  rooms  and  draw  up  a  chair.
Who  Will  Vote  the  Congo's  Stock  in  UMHK?
A  crucial  issue  in  the  Congo   affair   is  what  happens  to  the
stock  which  the  Congo  Government  under  the  Belgians  held
in  the  Union  Miniere  dtt  Haut  Katanga.    This  amounted  to
22.5   percent  of  the  total  shares  in  this  vast  mining   operation,
the  world's  largest  producer   of  cobalt  and  uranium  and  the
third  largest  producer  of  copper.     If  this  stock   goes   to  the
provincial  government  of  Katanga,  as  the  Belgians  and  their
allies  are  determined  that  it  shall,  the  stock  will  be  in  hands
they  can  control.    But  if  the  stock  goes  to  the  central  govern-
ment,  the  new  Republic  of  the  Congo  will  sit  as  a  major—
perhaps  -the  largest  single—shareholder  in  the  country's  most
lucrative  business,  ready  without  intervention   or  nationaliza-
tion   Cuban  style  to  take  a  hand   in  the  operations   and   the
profits.    There  a  Lumumba  would   sit  with  the   Rockefellers
in  a  new  kind  of  mixed  public-private  partnership,  for   the
Rockefellers   have   a   large   and   growing   interest   in   Union
Miniere  du Haut  Katanga,  and  are now  Belgium's  most  power-
ful   allies  in  the  struggle  to  maintain  control   of  the  Congo.
I  3
"No  Real  Political  Power"  —
They  Just  Control  Everything
Elisabethville  [capital  of  Katanga],   Sept.  19—In  the
province  of  Katanga,  the  great  mineral  treasury  of  the
Congo,  a  few  thousand  Belgians  still  control  just  about
everything,  but they  have  no real  political  power.  .  .  .
"In   Government   offices   there  is   a   Belgian   adviser
sitting   with  every  important  Katanga  official.     When
foreigners  approach  Katanga  officials  they  are  usually
referred  to  the  Belgian  aides.    All  the  official  'spokes-
men'  of  the  Government  are  Belgians.  .  .  .
"Belgians   attached   to   Government   offices   draw  up
most  of  the  official  papers  and  their  advice  is  usually
taken.    But  they  give  advice  not  orders."
—A.  M.  Rosenthal,  in  Nerc   York   Times,  Sept.  20.
This  appears  from   a  financial  study  of  the  mining  company
in  the  London  Observer  (July  10)  which  reported  "it  is  said
even  now  that  Rockefeller buying is putting  a  floor  under  the
price  of  U.M.H.K.,"  the  "even   now"   referring  to  indepen-
dence,  the  mutiny  and  the  armed  Belgian  intervention  which
followed.    "For  the  Rockefellers,  and  anyone  else with  a  long
purse  and  strong  nerves,"  this  account  added,  "this  may  yet
be  a  brilliant  speculation.   The  ore  is  magnificent,  and  so  is
the  organization;  the  only  doubt  is  political."     It  would   be
naive  to  suppose  that  the  Rockefeller  interests  are  not  trying
to  resolve  that  doubt.
To  see  in  perspective  the  tangled  and  shadowy  conflict  now
being  played  out  in  Leopoldville  and  New  York,  it  is  useful
to  sketch  in  the  picture  of  U.M.H.K.    This  company's  min-
ing  concessions  in  the   upper   Katanga   cover   13,000   square
miles.     It   employs,  according  to   Standard  &  Poor's,   2,216
Europeans  and  19,651  Africans.    The  present  tense  is  proper
since   Moody's    for   August   30   reported,   "despite   continued
political  crisis  in  the  Congo"  the  mines  were  "back   in   full
production"   after   having   being   closed   down   "during   the
Army  revolt  in  July."     Things   can't   be  going  too  badly  at
the   moment   despite   the   excitement   elsewhere,    because   Le
Monde's   (Sept.  19)   last  weekly  survey  of  the  Bourse   shows
that  U.M.H.K.  stock  rose  about  10  percent  during  the  week
ended  Sept.   16.    Even  in  the  prosy  language  of  Standard  &
Poor's   financial   manual   one   can   see  how  U.M.H.K.   must
dominate  the  landscape  of   its  province.     It   is  described   as
having  "24   affiliates   in  varied  fields—hydro-electric,  railways,
coal,  housing  construction  and  real  estate,  chemicals  (sulphuric
acid),  flour  mills,  forestry,  mineral  and  geological   research,
metallurgy,  explosives,  cement,  health  and  welfare,   insurance,
banking  and  nuclear  energy  research."     (After  all,  the  bombs
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   September    26',  1960
This Little Noticed Speech to the Security Council By Ghana  Best  Sums Up...
Those   who   would   see  the   Congo  crisis   through   the
eyes  of   the  people   who  live  there  rather  than  through
those  of  Washington   or  Moscow  can  find  no  better  guide
than  the  speech—excerpted   here—to  the  Security   Coun-
cil  Sept.   16   by  Mr.   Quaison-Sackey,   the   gifted    repre-
sentative  of   Ghana,  which  has  assumed   the   leadership
of  uncommitted   Africa.    This  speech  was  the  background
for    the   17-nation   Afro-Asian    resolution   approved   by
the   special  session   of   the   General  Assembly   Sept.   19.
It  shows  the. anxiety   of  the  neiv  States  to  navigate   be-
tween  the  two  great.  Power   blocs,  their    dissatisfaction
with  the   VN   command  in  the  Congo  but  their    defense
of    Mr.   Hammarskjold     against    Soviet    charges    which
threaten  to  disrupt  the  organization   which  is  still  their
hope  of  liberation  from   colonialism  and   cold   war.—IFS
"I  wish  to  thank  you,  Mr.  President,  and  the  other  mem-
bers   of  this  great   Council  for  giving  me  and  my  govern-
ment   this   opportunity  to  state   our   views  on  the   current
situation   in  the   Republic  of  the   Congo,  a  situation   which
has  been  changing  from  day  to  day  and  in  fact  from  hour
to   hour,   as   if  there  is   some  big  hand   which  is   bent   on
diverting   attention   from   the  main  problems   occasioned  by
incursions   being   made  by   Mr.   Tshombe   and   his   Belgian
advisers  into  the  very  foundations of  the  sovereignty  of  the
Republic  of  the  Congo.  .  .  .
"My   Government   was   the   first   Government  to   be   ap-
proached   by  the   Congolese  Government  for   direct   military
assistance;  if  we preferred  to  channel  such assistance  through
the  United  Nations,  it  was  because  .  .  .  the  alternative  for
Ghana   and  other   independent  States  was  to   intervene   di-
rectly   to  get   the   Belgians   out  of  the   Congo.   That  would
definitely   have  had  the  most   serious  repercussions.
What  Some  UN  Members  Forget
"It  is  agreed  that  the  primary  objective  of  the   Security
Council  is  to  help  the   Congolese   Central   Government  and
people  to   safeguard   their  independence  and  territorial  in-
tegrity.     However,   in   spite   of   their   concurrence   in   this
decision,  certain   Members  of  our  Organization  find  its  im-
plications  hard  to  accept.  .  .  .
"In   his   fourth   report,  the   Secretary   General   has   sug-
gested  that  emphasis  be  put  on the  protection  of  the  civilian
population  in  the  spirit  of  the  Declaration  of  Human  Rights
and  the   Convention  on  Genocide.   With  this  suggestion,  of
course,  my  Government  cannot  but  agree.    Some  clarifica-
tion,  however  is  obviously  necessary   when  it   is  suggested,
as  a  corollary,  that  this  may  necessitate  a  temporary  dis-
arming   of  military  units  which  are  an  obstacle  to  the   re-
establishment   of  law  and  order.
"There   is   and  there  can  only  be  one  national   army   in
the  Congo  and  this  army,  the  Armee  Nationale  Congolaise,
is  the  .only  Congolaise  force  that  can  be  recognized  by  the
United  States.   Anybody  who  raises  a  private  army,  either
on  his  own  initiative   or  at  the  prodding   of  foreign   vested
interests,  and   employs  that   armed   force   without   the   au-
thority  of  the  Central  Government  of  the  Congo,  or  against
that  Government, is  no  different  from  a  mutineer  and  should
be  treated  as  such.    It  is  these  elements  that  must  be  dis-
Belgium  Congolese Democracy!
"The  Soviet  representative  has  charged  Belgium  with
conspiracy  against  the  Congolese  Government.    He  also
accused  us  of  kindling  flames  of  civil  war.    In  the  eyes
of    the    representative    of    the    Soviet    Union,   which
ignores  freedom  of  the  press  or  of  speech,  any  polit-
ical  manifestation  easily  becomes  a  conspiracy,  or  even
civil  war.    The  political   regime   of  the   Congo  is  not
one   of   a   totalitarian   state.    It   is   a   parliamentary
democracy   where   difference   of   opinion   may   be   ex-
pressed   and  freely  opposed."
—Mr.  de  Thier,  Belgium,  Security   Council,  Sept.  16.
Atomic  Base  in  Congo
"The  Belgians  are  still  in  the  bases  of  Kamina  and
Kitona  for  strategic   reasons.  .  .  .  The French   news-
paper,  l,e  Monde,  of  25  August  revealed  to  us   exactly
what  Kamina  was.   It  said:  'The  Belgian  military  base
al  Kamina,  which  should  be  placed  under  UN  control,
was   built   to   resist   atomic  attack.    The   airfield   can
be   used   by   heavy  bombers   with   a   radius   of   8,000
kilometers   [5,000  miles].   With  equipment,  it   coat   7
billion  Belgian  francs   [$140  million  dollars].    It   still
holds  2,000  Belgian  officials  and  600 technicians.   .  .  .
Kamina  is,  therefore,  not  only  the  most  importanit  of
the   Congolese   bases   but   also,   potentially,   an   inter-
national   base.   .  .  .  Its  characteristics  are   those: of
NATO  airfields.  .  .  .'   That  is  why the  Belgians   cling
to  this  base.   That  is  why  Belgium  was  able  to  obtain
such   support.  .  .  .  While  military   bases   remain  in
Africa   .  .  .  our  continent  .  .  .  will  know  no  peace
and   no   security."
—Mr.   Caba,  Guinea,  Security   Council,  Sept.   16.
armed—of  course, without  bloodshed, if  possible.   This  applies
not  only  to  bands  of  soldiers   not  directly   subordinated   to
the  Central  Government  who  commit  arbitrary  acts  of  vio-
lence  but  also,  and  more  importantly   to  the  so-called  army
of  Katanga,  a  mercenary  force  officered   by  foreigners   and
directed  against  the  very  foundations of  the  Congolese  State
particularly  the  armed bands  at  the  disposal  of  Mr.  Tshombe
and  Mr.  Kalonji.  .  .  .
"I  suggest  that  the  Security   Council  should  address  itself
specifically   to   this   question   of   continued   arms   deliveries
by  the  Belgians  to  Mr.  Tshombe  and  the  fact  that  units  of
the  so-called  Katanga  army  and  police  are   officered  by   Bel-
gians.    I  believe  that  this  issue  should  be  dealt   with   sep-
arately   and   should  not   be  coupled   with   the   issue   of   the
Central  Government  receiving  aid from  outside  sources.  .  . .
"The   United   Nations,   adhering   to   its   principle   of   non-
intervention  between  the  Central  Government  and  the  seces-
sionists,   precludes  itself   from   supplying   to   the  legitimate
Government  of  the   Congo  the  necessary  means  for  trans-
porting  its  troops  in  its  efforts  to  maintain  law  and   order
in   the   entire   territory   of   the   Congo,   including   Katanga.
Also,  while  the   Leopoldville  radio  station  has   been   closed
down  on  the  ground  that  conflict  may  thereby   be  averted,
and  while  the  Central  Government  has,  therefore,   no  chance
of  explaining   its  position,  the   Brazzaville   radio,   which  be-
longs   to   a   country   very   much   disposed   towards   certain
persons   [Kasavabu—IFS]   involved  in  the   political   conflict
of  the  Republic of  the  Congo,  is  reported  to  be  broadcasting
and   providing   facilities   on  behalf   of  the   secessionist    ele-
ments.   At  the  same  time,  Belgium   is  supplying   arms  and
officer   personnel   for   the   forces   of  these  elements.
"In  this  connection  I  wish  to   quote   a  statement  issued
by  my  Government  today,  which  was  carried  by  the  London
Daily  Mail  of  9  September:
" 'Ghana  Government  accepts  as  substantially   correct  the
account  given  in  this  Daily  Mail  issue  of  Friday,  9  Septem-
ber,   of   the   extent   to   which   the   Belgian    government    is
supporting   the   Bakwanga   regime   in   Katanga.     Since   11
July   Belgium  has  flown  in  over   a  hundred  tons  of  arms,
including   mortars,   sub-machine    guns   and   FM   automatic
rifles.  Twenty-five  Belgian  Air  Force  planes  with  their  crews
have  been  placed   at   the  disposal  of  the   Tshombe   Govern-
ment.   Eighty-nine   Belgian   officers  and  NCO's   [non-commis-
sioned  officers]  have  been  formally  seconded  to  the  Tsihombe
forces  and  326  Belgian   officers  and  NCO's  are  now  serving
in  the  Tshombe  army  as  volunteers.   This  action  by  Belgium
is  in  complete  disregard  of  the  Security  Council  resolutions.
The  Government of  Ghana  cannot  believe  that  Belgium would
act  in  this  fashion  unless  it  had  been  assured  of  some  out-
side  support.    If   this   is  so,  the  situation   is  one  of  great
gravity  in  that  it  implies  that  one  at  least  of  the  permanent
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   September   26, 1960
... The  New  Africa's  Attitude Toward  the UN  and the  Soviets in the Congo
members   of   the   Security   Council   is   assisting   Belgium   to
deny  the  orders of  the  Council."
"It  is  rather  difficult,  in  the  face  of  such  actions,  to  com-
plain  if  the  legitimate  Government  of  the   Congo  felt  com-
pelled   to   seek   help   from   outside   in  order  to   be  able   to
establish   its  authority  and  to   deal  with   those   who,  under
Belgian  protection  and  with  Belgian  help,  continue  to   defy
its   authority   and  to  work  for   the   dismemberment  of   the
State.    Surely  no  one here  can  deny  the  Central  Government
the   light   to  carry   out  its   legitimate  task   of  establishing
its  authority.
"We  recognize,  however, that  such  help  can  be  dangerous.
We  in  Ghana  reiterate   our  support   for  the  principle  that,
wherever   possible,   all   aid   to   the   newly   independent  and
under-developed   nations   should  be  channelled   through   the
United  Nations.  .  .  .  We  have  always  taken  the  view  that
u  multilateral  UN  aid  program   is  the  best  hope  of  getting
East   and  West  to  co-operate  to  eradicate   disease,  poverty,
hunger  and  ignorance  in  large  areas  of  the  world.   We  have
always   felt   that   such  a  program   offers   the   best   hope  of
arresting  the  so-called  cold  war.   .  .  .
Nkrumah's  Warning  to  the  UN
"Mr.  President,  allow  me  to  quote  from  a  broadcast   made
on   7  September   1960   by   my  President,  Osagyefo   Kwame
Nkrumah:   'The  policy  of  my  Government  is  to   keep   the
cold  war  out  of  Africa.  .  .  .  Our  objects,  however,  may  be
frustrated   by  those   powers  who  have   a   positive   interest
in  the   division  and  balkanization  of  Africa.   .  .  .  Law  and
order  can  only  be  restored   if  the  Government  of  the  Congo
Hepublic,   which   invited  the   UN   to   enter   the   Congo  and
which  was  formed   in  accordance  with  the   constitution   and
with  the   support   of  the   Congolese  Parliament,   is   actively
supported   by  the   UN.   The  UN  will  become  discredited  if
it  allows  itself   to  be  used  as  a  cover  for  those  who  would
spread  confusion  in  the  Congo  Republic  in  order  to  strangle
its  independence.'
"The   aim  of  the   UN  military  and  technical  assistance,
therefore,  in  my  view  and  in  the  view  of  the  Ghana  govern-
ment,  should  be  to  support   the  legally  constituted   Govern-
ment  of  the  Congo.  .  .  .  The  aim  of  the  UN  effort   in  the
Congo  is  not  to  bolster  the  ideological  preoccupations  of  this
or  that  group  of  Powers;  nor  is  it  to  prevent  the   Congolese
Government  and  people  from  developing  normal  and  friendly
relations  with  all  Members  of  the   UN.
"The  principle  of  non-intervention,  as  interpreted  by  the
Secretary-General  and  applied  to  the  operations  of  the  UN
force   in  the   Congo,  has   now  come  up  against   difficulties.
To  the  Government  of  Ghana,  this  application   of  this  doc-
trine  of  non-intervention  in  the  light  of  the  Security  Council
resolutions   has   brought   about   much   misapprehension   and
misunderstanding.   .  .  .  But  the   President   of   Ghana   has
always  been  honest   in  expressing   his   concern   or  request-
ing  clarifications   from  the  appropriate  quarters.   To  us  the
office   of  the   Secretary-General   of   our   world   Organization
is  very  dear,  and  my  President   would  like  me  to   appeal
to   this   Council  to   refrain   from   all   personal   attacks  on
Mr.  Hammarskjold.   The clear  vision  of  this  man, his  merited
rank,  his  superior  eloquence,  his  splendid  qualities,  his  emi-
Poland  Twits  The  West
"It   is   rather  surprising  that   some   representatives
in   this   Council   who  usually  attach   so   much  weight
to  the  parliamentary  system  prevailing  in  this  coun-
tries   do   not   recognize,  in   fact   entirely   ignore,   the
parliamentary  machinery  of  other states.  .  . The Prime
Minister   [Lumumba]  of   the   Central  Government  of
the  Republic  of  the  Congo  has  repeatedly,  during  the
last  few  days,  gained  the  vote  of  confidence  from  the
Parliament   of   the   Congo.   What   else   is   required  to
prove  the  lawfulness  of   a  government?"
—Mr.  Lewandowski,  Poland,  pleading  with  Security
Council  Sept.  H   io   hear   Lumumba's    representative.
Why  Tshombe  Likes  Mobutu
"Elisabethville   [Katanga],   The   Congo,   Sept.   18—
Congolese   government   soldiers   received  orders  today
to   withdraw   from   the  secessionist   states   of  Katanga
and  South  Kasai.  .  .  .  But  a  Belgian  officer  attached
to  Mr.  Kalonji's  tiny  army  said  exultantly  that  South
Kasai  would  be  free  of  the  central  government's  sol-
diers  in  a  few  days.  .  .  .  The  orders  from  Leopoldville
picked   up  by   radio  here  apparently   came   from   Col.
Joseph  Mobutu,  army  chief  of  staff,  who  seized  power
in   the  capital  last  week.  .  .  .
"Meanwhile,  Moise  Tshombe,  President  of  Katanga,
sent  a  message  to  his  two  representatives  in  Brazza-
ville,   in  the   former  French  Congo,   to  assure  Colonel
Mobutu  of  his  backing.    Mr.  Tshombe  told  his  repre-
sentatives   that   Colonel   Mobutu,   President   Kasavubu
and  Premier Ileo  represented the  best  in  Congo opinion
and  politics."
—New   York   Times,   Sept.   19.
nent  services,  the  vast  place  he  fills  in  the  eyes  of  mankind,
must  embolden us to pay tribute to him for  his great  services
in  the  cause  of  peace.  .  .  .
"Everything   seems  to  be  in  a  state  of  flux,  and  it  might
be  as  well  if  the  principle   of  non-intervention   were  clearly
defined  and  not  applied  circumstantially.   The  Security   Coun-
cil  should  state  clearly  that,  until   such  time  as  the   Congo-
lese   people  themselves   decide  to  alter  their  constitutional
arrangements,  the  law and order which  the  Council is  pledged
to  maintain  can  be  none  other   than  that   embodied  in  the
loi  fundamentals   of  the  Republic  of  the  Congo  and  as  rep-
resented  by the Central  Government  of the  Congo.  . . .
"With  your  permission,   I  will  now  make  a  few  general
observations   on  the   present   constitutional   situation   in  the
Congo.    It   was   indeed   a  matter   of  great   regret   to   the
Government  of Ghana that  Mr. Kanza  [representing  Lumum-
ba]  was  not  seated   at  this  table.    By  refusing  to  seat  Mr.
Kanza,  a  representative   of  the   legal   central   Government
of  the  Congo, this  Council  has,  alas,  strengthened   the  hands
of  Mr.  Kasavubu  and  others  who  have  shown  contempt  for
the loi fundamentals.  . . .
"It  will  be  recalled  that  in  February  this  year  a  round-
table  conference  was  held  in  Brussels  at  which  certain  reso-
lutions  were  agreed  and  adopted  by  all  parties  in  the  Congo,
including   those   elements   that   are   now  cutting   separatist
capers.    On  the  basis  of  and  co-extensively  with  these  reso-
lutions,  the   Belgian   Parliament  passed   a  fundamental  law
for   the   constitution   of  the   Republic.    In   accordance  with
this  constitution,  general  elections  were  held,  and  Mr.  Lu-
mumba,  who  secured  the  requisite  parliamentary   majority,
became  Prime   Minister.
"The  letter  of  this  constitution   only  allows  the  President
to  dismiss  a  Government  if  it  is  defeated   in  the  Chambers
[of  Parliament].    Quite  apart  from   the   technical   meaning
of  the  constitution,  it  is  also  clear  from  resolution  3  of  the
Brussels   conference   that   the   ministers   are   responsible   to
Parliament   and  not  to  the  President  and  can  be  dismissed
only  in  the  event  of  a  vote  of  non-confidence.  .  .  .
"It  is  correct,  as  the  Secretary-General  mentioned  in  his
statement,   that   the   President    [Kasavubu]    has   the  right
under  article  22  to  revoke  the  mandate  of  the  Prime  Min-
ister   [Lumumba],   but  I  would  point   out,  with   your   per-
mission,  that  this  right  is  subject  to  article  14, which  says
that  all  powers  must  be  exercised  in  the  manner  established
by  law  and  could  only  be  exercised   if   a  vote  of  non-confi-
dence  passed,  which  is  not  the   case  at   present,  when  an
illegal  Government headed by Mr. Ileo is  invoked. . . .
"The   obvious  course  for  the  UN  in  the  meantime  is  to
put  its  authority   behind  the  compromise  proposed  by  both
chambers  [of  the  Parliament],  that  the  status  quo  be  pre-
served,  with  Mr.  Kasavubu  as  President  and  Mr.  Lumumba
as  Prime  Minister.
1   3   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   September   26,  1960
The  Spanish  Republic,  Too, Had  the   Benefits  of  "Non-Intervention"
(Continued   from   Page   One)
which  fell  on  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki   were  made  from  the
uranium  of  Katanga).    Wtihout  additional  investment,   from
revaluations  and   reserves,  the  capital  assets  of   this  company
have  risen  from  one  billion  Belgian   francs   ($20,000,000)  in
1947   to  10  billion  Belgian   francs   ($200,000,000)   in  May
I960,  a vivid  example  of  what  cold  war  and  nuclear  arms  race
could  do  for  a business  in  the right  line.    Earnings  in  the  same
happy  period   rose  from  $8  per  share  in   1947   to  $56.93  per
share  in  1959,  and  as Nelson  Rockefeller  was  saying  just  the
other  day on  TV  (Open   Hearing,  Sept.  4),  "I  think   freedom
is  indivisible.  .  .  .  We  have  got  to  be  ready  to  fight  for  it
whether  it  is  in  Korea  or  Hungary  or  Congo,"    Here   free-
dom  takes  on  dimensions undreamed of  by  such  rustic theore-
ticians  as  Jefferson  or  Locke.
Africans  Still  Prefer  the  UN  to   Moscow
-  To  attain  the  objective of  a  Congo  governed  in  a  way  which
will  be  satisfactory  to  these  private  interests  something  very
similar  to  the  farce  of  non-intervention  in  the-Spanish. Civil
War   has  been  played   out  behind  the  facade  of  the   United
Nations.     While  the  UN   command  has  taken  up  a  neutral
non-interventionist   position   between   the   central   government
and  the  secessionist provinces,  the  Belgians  have  been  able  to
consolidate  their  control  in  Katanga  and  in  the  diamond  min-
ing  area  of  South  Kasai  and  are  now  reaching  out  to  establish
control   at  the  center  in  Leopoldville,  if  necessary  through  a
military  dictatorship.    But  the  parallel  with   Spain  can  easily
be  pressed   too  far.    There   are   differences   which   are   vital.
One   is  the   existence  of   a   United   Nations   organization   in
which  the  Asian-African bloc  now  holds  the  balance   between
the-  Communist  and  capitalist  powers.    The  UN   is  their  one
hope  of  obtaining  aid  without   losing  their  independence  to
either  side.    Though  the  Africans,  like  the  other  neutrals,  are
discontented  with  the  UN's  course  in the  Congo  and  its  failure
to  work  with  the  central  government  of  Lumumba  as  estab-
lished  by  the  legally  elected  Parliament,  they  still  see  in  Mr.
Hammarskjold  a  friend  and  have  no  desire  to  become   depen-
dent  on  the  Russians  in  a  sharply  split  world   where  Africa
As  in  The  Old  Shell  Game
"An  even  more  ingenious  scheme,  which  may  not  be
accepted   by  the   Congolese,   has  also  been  suggested.
The   idea   was   that   the   Congolese   should   vest   their
holdings  in  the  mining  and  other  companies  in  a  joint
Beige-Congolese   corporation,   and  in   return   the  Bel-
gians  would  pay  so  many  millions  a  year  into  it.    The
result  would  be  a  first-class  borrower  on  the  interna-
tional    market,    plenty   of   funds   for   the   Congo—and
effective    Belgian   control   over   the   alienated   shares."
—The    Observer    (London)    July    10;   Mammon    in
Brussels:  Haute   Finance  d«  Haut   Katanga.
might  find  itself  the  first  battleground   of  a  new  world   war.
They  showed  their  power  in  the  emergency  session  of  the  Gen-
eral   Assembly  when   they   forced   the   Russians  not   only   to
abstain  from  voting  against  their   17-nation  resolution   setting
up  a  special  UN  fund  for  the  Congo  but  to  vote   separately
in  favor  of  Paragraph  6  which  calls  on  all  States  "to  refrain
from  the  direct  and  indirect  provision  of  arms  or  other  ma-
terials  of  war  and  military personnel  and  other  assistance  for
military   purposes  in  the  Congo"  except   through   the   United
Nations.
At  the  same  time  the  African  bloc  used   Soviet  intransi-
geance  to  force  the  Western  powers  to  inch  forward  a  little
in  the  direction  of  supporting  the  central  Congolese  govern-
ment.    The  Russians   did  the  African   bloc  a  favor   by  veto-
ing  the  weak  Ceylon-Tunisia  resolution  in  the  Security  Coun-
cil;  the  fact  that  only  Liberia  and  Tunisia  could  be  persuaded
to   speak   up   for   it   in   the   Security  Council  was   indicative.
The   17-nation   resolution   framed   under   the   leadership   of
Ghana  in  the  special  session  for  the  first  time  asks  the  Secre-
tary  General  "io  assist  the  Central  Government   of  the  Congo"
in  restoring  law  and   order   "throughout   the  territory  of   the
Republic  of  the  Congo  and  to  safeguard   its  unity."    Whether
and  to  what  degree  this  mandate  will  be  carried  into   action
remains  to  be  seen.    Here  it  would  be  essential  to  know  what
assurances  if  any  were  given  the  African  States  by  Mr.   Ham-
marskjold—and  the  U.  S.—for  their  support.
Last   JFeefc's   Offer    Still  Stands   —   A  Free  Sample   Copy    If   You  Send  A  Stamped   Addressed   Long   Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Are,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name ........................................................................................
Street ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
0/26/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................:...............................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D     No  D
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington    15,   D.  C.
Second class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March   3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15, D.  C.
An   independent   weekly    published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:
Sn  in  the   U.  S.;  $6  In  Canada;  $10 elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  tlo  to  Europe;  J20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED