I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960feb29.pdf

============================================================

On  That  New  German  Arms  Deal  With   Franco,  P.  2
White  House  Industrial  Security  Order Does  Queasily  What  Walter  Faceleas  Informer  Bill  Does  Openly,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VIII,  NO.  8FEBRUARY   29, 1960
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
If  the  Supreme  Court  Were  Packed  With  Dixiecrats
At  first  glance  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  Daisy  Bates
i'.  Little  Rock  seems  to  uphold  the  right  of  political privacy.
The   Court   was   unanimous   in   reversing  the   conviction  of
NAACP  officials  who  refused  to  furnish  city  officials  with  the
names  of  their  members.    The  Court  upheld  their  plea  "that
the  public disclosure  of  our  members  and  contributors  might
lead  to  their  harassment,  economic reprisals,  and  even bodily
harm."    Mr.  Justice  Stewart  for   the  Court  said  it  was  now
"beyond  dispute that  freedom  of  association for  the  purpose of
advancing  ideas and  airing grievances is  protected  by  the  Due
Process  clause  of  the  14th Amendment  from  invasion  by  the
States."    He  quoted  from  the  similar  case  of  NAACP  v. Ala-
bama  two  years ago,   "Inviolability  of  privacy  in  group  asso-
ciation  may  in  many  circumstances be  indispensable to  preser-
vation  of  freedom  of  association,  particularly  where  a  group
espouses  dissident  beliefs."    On   its   face   this  appears  to  re-
affirm  traditional  liberties.
Only When Not  Too Dissident
But  more  closely examined what  the  Court  really  said  is  that
it  will  uphold  the  right  of  privacy  to  protect  dissident  groups
only  when  they  are  not  too  dissident  for  the  taste  of  the  ma-
jority.   The   meaning  of  the  decision   becomes  clearer  if  one
turns  to  the  concurring opinion  by  Black  and  Douglas.     They
felt  that  the  Arkansas ordinances  "violate  freedom  of  speech
and  assembly  guaranteed  by  the  First  Amendment  which  the
Court  has  many  times  held  was  made  applicable  to  the  States
by   the  Fourteenth."     They   argued   "that   First   Amendment
rights  are  beyond  abridgment  either  by  legislation  that directly
restrains   their. exercise   or   by   suppression    or    impairment
through  harassment, humiliation,  or  exposure  by  government."
The   majority   approach   was   different.     It   proceeded   not
from  the  clear  words  of  the  First  Amendment  but  from  the
"balancing"  doctrine of  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter.    As  Mr. Jus-
tice  Stewart  said,  "Where  there  is  a  significant  encroachment
upon  personal  liberty, the  State may prevail  only  upon  showing
a  subordinating   interest  which  is  compelling."    When  basic
freedoms  are  threatened,  Mr.  Justice  Stewart  said,  "it  becomes
the  duty  of  this  Court  to  determine  whether  the  action  bears
a  reasonable  relationship  to  the  achievement  of  the   govern-
mental  purposes  asserted  as  its  justification."    The  Court  did
not  think  these  asserted  purposes   sufficient   to  outweigh   the
NAACP's rights.
This  is  the  fourth  case  in  four  years  which  has  dealt  with
the  right  of  the  States  to  intrude  on  political  privacy.    They
provide  an  illuminating  pattern.     In  June,   1957,  the   Court
held   (Clark   dissenting)   that   the   State  of  New    Hampshire
could  not  send  Paul  Sweezy to jail for  refusing  to answer  ques-
3
A  Washington  Warning  No Longer  Fashionable
Looking  through the  Washington's Birthday  speeches
which  poured  from  the  mimeograph  machines of Capitol
Hill  last  week-end,  we  didn't  find  a  single   one  which
pegged  off  with what  was  once  a  favorite passage  from
the  Farewell  Address  but  seems  to  have  gone  out  of
fashion.    We  refer   to   Washington's  warning   against
"overgrown  military  establishments,  which,  under  any
form  of  government, are  inauspicious  to  liberty."   This
would  have  made  an  excellent  text  from  which  to  deal
with  Air  Force  security  manuals  which  regard  Protes-
tant  ministers  and  school  teachers  as  prima  facie sus-
pect,  and treat with  derision  the  public's right  to  know.
Washington's  words  are  also   relevant  to   the  current
nightmares  cooked  up  by  rebellious  Generals  and  Ad-
mirals  trying  to  frighten  more  money  out  of   Congress
than  the  President,  their  civilian   commander  in   chief,
thinks   necessary.     Our  military  establishment   is   so
fearsomely   overgrown  that   aspiring   politicians   when
they  come to  make patriotic addresses  on Feb. 22 natur-
ally  forget   to  mention  Washington's  warning.    What
used  to  be  a  safe  cliche  has  suddenly  become  too  live
and hot.
tions  about  his  associates  in  the  Progressive  Party.    In  June,
1958,  Mr.  Justice  Harlan  held  that  the  NAACP  could  not  be
punished  for  contempt  because  it  refused  to  obey  an  Alabama
judge's  order  to  disclose its  members.    Pointedly,  he  based  his
decision  on  his  own  concurring opinion   (with  Frankfurter)   in
Sweezy  where  Harlan  made  much  of  the  fact  that  Sweezy  had
not  refused  to  answer  questions  about  his  relations  with   the
Communist  Party,  but  only  with  the  (supposedly   less  subver-
sive)   Progressive   Party.    Then  last  June,  Harlan  and  Frank-
furter  joined  in  the  5-to-4 decision by Mr.  Justice  Clark  which
upheld  a  year's  sentence  on  Dr.  Willard   Uphaus  for  refusing
to  give  New  Hampshire  a  list  of  the  guests  at  his  Peace  Fel-
owship  camp.    Here  the  majority  held  that  First  Amendment
rights   were   outweighed   by  the   State's   need   "to   determine
whether  there  were  subversive  persons  in  New  Hampshire."
This  implies  that  the  First  Amendment  does  not  apply  to
"subversives"   and  the  test  is what  five  judges  consider  as  fall-
ing  within  that  vague  witch  hunter's  category.    In  the  South
today  the  NAACP  is  the  No.  1  Subversive  Organization  and
the  Arkansas  Supreme  Court  in  that  climate  found  it  easy  to
uphold   the  Little  Rock  ordinances.    A  U.S.  Supreme   Court
with  a  Dixiecrat  majority  woud  have  found  it  just  as  easy  by
using  the  Frankfurter  doctrine  to  balance  away  the  NAACP's
liberties.    This  doctrine  substitutes  the  political  prejudices  and
fears  of  a  shifting  majority  for  the  unambiguous  mandate  of
the  First  Amendment.    Presently   it  allows   political  privacy,
but  only  to  those  views  not  considered  too  dangerous.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  29,  1960
Won't  the  West  Germans  Be  Even  Harder  to  Control  Once  They  Have  Atom  Bombs?
The  Lesson  in  the  Leak  of  Secret  Arms  Talks  Between  Franco  and  Strauss
The  New  York  Times  is  not  a  crusading  paper.    Leaks  to
it  have  the  character  of  unofficial  communiques.    When  Cyrus
Sulzberger   revealed  in  the  Times   last  Monday   that   Franco
Spain   and  West   Germany  were  engaged   in   secret  military
negotiations  which  had  Allied   statesmen  disturbed,   it  was  a
safe  guess that  one  of  these disturbed  statesmen  as  a  last  resort
had  leaked  the  news  to  the  Times.     Since  the  dateline  was
Paris,   it  was  also  a  natural   guess  that   the   leak   came   from
NATO  headquarters.     These   guesses   were   reinforced    next
day  when  the  Times  reported  from  Bonn  that  Gen.  Norstad,
NATO's  military  chief,  had  met  with  West.German  Defense
Minister  Strauss  "last  month  and  sought  to  dissuade  him  from
the  plan."    The  big  argument  for  bringing  the  Germans  into
NATO was that  this  would  make  it  easier  to  keep  them  under
control.    Apparently  the  controls   are  already  proving   inade-
quate.    This  merits  sober  consideration  before  going  on  with
the  plan  to  give  nuclear  arms  to  the   Germans.
Too Much Like  Old Times
By  obtaining   bases  in   Spain,  West  Germany  might   free
itself   from  the  Paris  Treaty   restriction   which  forbade  it  to
manufacture  atomic,  biological  and  chemical  weapons  "in  its
territory."    Sukberger  wrote  meaningfully,   "Spain  is  neither
German  territory nor  subject  to the  Allied  controls  that  govern
Germany's  new  arms."    Again,  it  should  be  underscored  that
this  was  printed   in  a  paper   which  is  pro-NATO  and  pro-
Adenauer.    Hitler's  Germany  used  Spain  as  a  testing  ground
for  World  War  II.    It  is  not  too  early  to  make  sure  that  it  is
not  used  as a  testing  ground  for  World  War  III.    This  is too
much  like old  times.
While  these  revelations   created  an  angry  stir  in   London,
Washington  chugs  along  on the  line  that  the  Germans  are our
most  reliable  allies  and  that  some  way must  be  found  to  give
them  nuclear  weapons.     Humphrey   in  a  statement   over   the
week-end  came  out  against  the  grant  of  nuclear  weapons  to
allies,   though   without  mentioning  the  Germans.    No   other
candidate  for  the  Presidency  has  even  touched  on  the  subject
and  only  one  other  Senator,  Monroney,  has  spoken  up  against
a  new  nuclear give-away.
In  reporting  Humphrey's  opposition,  the  New  York   Times
disclosed    (Feb.  22)   that  the  Administration  is  moving  back
to  the  idea  of  using the  President's  "inherent  powers"  for  nu-
clear  arms  transfers  so  that  it  can  avoid  a  debate  in  Congress.
Like Anderson and  Holifield  of  the  Joint Committee on Atomic
Energy,  Humphrey  does  not  believe  the  Administration  has
power  to  act without  asking  Congress  to  change  the  law  which
forbids   such  transfers.    What  if   the   Administration  under
cover   of   some   phony   emergency   should   ask  discretionary
powers  to  give  out  nuclear  arms  if  necessary?
In  the  House  Feb.  17, Meyer  of  Vermont  made  an  eloquent
appeal  against a  new  nuclear give-away.   He  was  supported  by
Byron   Johnson   of   Colorado,   Kowalski   of   Connecticut   and
Kastenmeier  of  Wisconsin.    Meyer  in  turn  commended  Wolf
of  Iowa  for  his  remarks  on  the  subject  Feb.  4  and  Holifield
of  Connecticut  for  his  speech  of  Feb.  9.    Of  all  the   liberal
Democrats  in  the  House,  only  these  six  have  spoken  up.
Foreign  Aid for Nuclear  Armament?
Last  year  Meyer  of  Vermont  led  a  fight  to  prevent  foreign
aid  funds  from  being  used  to  finance  nuclear  arms  for  our
allies.    He  was  assured  on  the  floor  of  the  House  July  28  by
Passman   (D.  La.),  chairman  of  the  Appropriations  subcom-
mittee  in  charge,  that  none  of  these  funds  would  be  used  for
this  purpose.    When  Secretary  of  State  Herter  was  before  the
House  Foreign   Affairs   Committee  the  morning  of  February
17, Meyer  asked  him  whether  any foreign  aid  funds  would  be
used  to finance the  sharing  of  nuclear  weapons  systems.    Her-.
ter  said  he  would  prefer  to  discuss  the  matter  in  executive
session.    Meyer  protested   that  he  would   oppose  the  foreign
aid  bill  "unless  the  American  people  know  what  is  going   on."
Herter  said  he  was  "not  trying  to  evade  the  question  at  all,  I
am  merely  reserving  the  right,  if  I  may,  to  answer  it  in  execu-
tive  session."     It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the  question
cannot  be  answered  in  public,  unless  indeed—contrary  to  last
year's  assurances—we  are using  foreign  aid  to  finance  nuclear
armament.
Why  Was  This  Report  on  Radiation  Dangers  So  Long  Withheld  From  Publication?
We  suggest  that  scientists  associated with the  work of  the
National  Committee on  Radiation  Protection  investigate  the
handling  by  its  chairman, Dr.  Lauriston  Taylor,  of  the  Ad
Hoc  Committee  report  which has  just  been  published  in  the
Feb.  19 issue  of  Science.   We  wonder  why  this  took  so  long
to  see  the  light  of  day  and  why  its  recommendations were
withheld  from  the  Holifield  committee  hearings  on  fallout
last  year.
Those  who  look  at  the  article  in  Science  will  see  that  it  is
dated May 6.  The  Holifield  hearings  began  May  5.   Had  this
report  been  made  available  to  the   Holifield   committee,  it
would  have  shown  that  the   Ad  Hoc  committee  of  NCRP
agreed  with  the  International  Committee  on  Radiological
Protection   on   the   need   for   drastically   lower   population
safety  standards.
Just  before  the  hearings,  those  agencies   in  favor  of  nu-
clear  testing  were engaged  in a  press  campaign to  disparage
the  dangers  of  fallout.   Dr.  Taylor  contributed  to  this  by  a
press  release  which  gave  the  impression that  the  strontium
90  peril was  being  "downgraded." The  report  of  the  Ad  Hoc
Committee  would  have  undercut  this  campaign.
Dr.  Taylor  was  before the  Holifield  committee May  7  in  a
panel  on  radiation  standards.   He  said  that  he  had  just  re-
ceived  a  report  from  an  Ad  Hoc  committee  and  would  be
glad  to  make  it  available  to  the  Holifield  committee "when
and  if"  approved  by  the  full  NCRP.   He  gave  no indication
that  this  report  recommended stricter  safety  standards.
The  hearings  contain a  notation  (at  page  1609)  that  "the
report  referred  to  had not  been  approved  at  the  time  of pub-
lication."  The  final  volume  of   the  hearings  did  not  go   to
press  until  Dec.  2.   Dr.  Taylor  told  the  Weekly  the  Ad  Hoc
Committee  report  was  circulated  to  the  full   NCRP  some
time  last  Fall  but  that  it  was  not  submitted  for  approval
and  was  released  "for  information  purposes  only."
Dr.  Taylor  has  the  industry point  of  view  on  safety  stan-
dards  and  the  AEC  point  of  view  on  testing.   We  believe
that  if  this  Ad  Hoc  Committee had  concluded that radiation
was not  as dangerous as  hitherto believed, plenty would have
been  heard  about it  months ago.    We believe its  release  was
delayed  because  its  conclusions  were  unwelcome.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

J. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  29,1960
White  House  Does  Queasily  What  Walter  Faceless  Informer  Bill  Does  Openly
No  Firm  Rights  Given  Accused  Defense  Workers  by  New  Security  Order
Several  million workers in  defense plants  will  be  affected  by
the  President's  new  order  on  industrial  security.    It  hardly
gives  their  jobs and  reputations  the  kind  of  protection  tradi-
tional  standards of  fairness require.    If  a  man  is  denied  access
to  his  job  on  security  grounds,  he  is  to  be  given  "a  written
statement  of  the  reasons"  which  will  be  "as   comprehensive
and  detailed as  the  national security permits."   This  is  the  fa-
miliar  formula  of  loyalty-security  proceedings.    Experience  has
shown  this  often  means that  charges  are  stated  in  so  vague  a
form  as  to  make  effective  disproof   impossible.
A  hearing is granted  and  the  accused  may  be  represented  by
counsel.     "An   opportunity  to   cross-examine  persons   either
orally  or  through written interrogatories"  is allowed  but  this  is
circumscribed,  first  of  all  as  to  subject matter.    Section  3   (6)
says  it  does  not  extend  to  "characterizations"  in  the   charges
"of  any  organization or  individual other  than  the   applicant."
This  is  a  serious  restriction  since  most  "charges"  tend  to  be
charges  of   association  with  allegedly   "disloyal"   persons   or
membership  in  some  suspect  organization.
A Handicap for the  Defense
If  accused of  association with  Mr.  X,  one  may cross-examine
to prove that  one did  not  associate with  Mr.  X  but  one  cannot
cross-examine  to  prove  that  Mr.  X  is  a  decent  citizen,  or  that
the  reasons  for  suspecting  Mr.  X  are  ludicrous.    Similarly,  if
accused  of  having  belonged  to  the  long  defunct   Washington
Bookshop,  one  may cross-examine to  disprove  membership  but
not  to prove that  the  Bookshop  was an  innocuous  organization.
The  right  of   cross-examination,  i.e.   of   confronting   one's
accusers,  is  also  circumscribed  by  allowing  for  the   exemption
of  informers.   Section  4  (1)  permits  the  head  of  the  depart-
ment  which  supplied  an  accusatory  statement  to  exempt  the
source  from  cross-examination  on   the  ground   that   it   came
from  " a  confidential  informant who  has  been  engaged  in ob-
taining  intelligence information."    Many  of  these  confidential
informants,   when  subjected  to  cross-examination   in  judicial
proceedings,  have  proven  to  be  psychopaths   and  perjurers.
Error,  malice or  fantasy  on  their part  would  be  shielded  from
scrutiny.
A  different  rule  is set up  for  casual  informants.   These may
be  exempt  from  cross-examination if  they  cannot  appear   "due
to  death,  severe  illness  or  similar cause"  in  which  case,  how-
ever their identity  and what they said would  be  disclosed  to  the
accused.   As  an  alternative, these  casual  informants  may  also
be  excused  "due  to  some  other  cause  determined  by  the  head
Alert  Your  Senators
The   Walter   "faceless   informer"   industrial   security
bill,  HR  8121,  is  now  in  the  Senate   Internal   Security
Committee  where  Dodd  of  Connecticut  is  pressing   for
swift  action.    In the  House  not  a  single  liberal  spoke  up
and  this  bill  was  passed  by  unanimous  consent   Feb.  2.
Will  Senate  liberals  prove  as  weak?   Hennings   might
call  attention  to  the  issues  by  hearings  on the  new  exec-
utive  order  before  his  Constitutional  rights  subcommit-
tee  if  enough  interest  were  manifested,  particularly  by
the  labor  movement  which  ought  to  be   concerned.
of  the  department  to  be  good  and  sufficient,"   in  which   case
their  identity  and  accusation  would  not  be  disclosed.
There  is a  third  escape  clause which  has  not  generally  been
noticed.   This   is  in  Section   6.    The  heads   of   investigative
agencies,  though  directed  to  cooperate  "in  identifying persons
who  have  made  statements adverse  to  the  applicant  and  in  as-
sisting  him  in  making  them  available  for  cross-examination",
need  only  cooperate  "so  far  as  the  national  security  permits."
This  would  allow  the  heads  of  FBI,  CIA,  military  and  naval
intelligence,  and  other  spy  agencies  to  decide  for  themselves
how  far  they  need  go  in  disclosing  sources  of  information.
If  witnesses  cannot  be  produced  for  cross-examination,  the
head  of  the  employing department  is supposed  to  consider  "in-
formation   furnished   by  the  investigative  agency  involved  as
to  the  reliability of  the  person   [i.e.  the  accuser]  and  the  ac-
curacy  of  the  statement concerned."   The  accused is to  be given
a  summary of  this  "which  shall  be  as  comprehensive  and  de-
tailed  as the  national  security permits"  and final determination
of  the  case shall  be made  "only  by the  head  of  the  department
based  upon  his  personal  review  of  the   case."     These   safe-
guards  may mean  as much  or  as little  as  the  officials  concerned
care to make  them.
As  if  all  these  loopholes  weren't  enough,  the  final  section
of  the  executive  order  cancels  itself  out  by  allowing  any  de-
partment  head  to  act  without  hearing  of  any  kind  when  he
thinks  the  national  security  requires  it.    The   difference   be-
tween  this  order  and  the  Walter  "faceless  informer"  security
bill,  HR  8121,  is that  the  latter  simply strips  defense  workers
of   any  rights  in  clearance  cases.    The   White  House  order
shame-facedly  permits  the  same  star  chamber  -procedures,  but
leaves  the  door  ajar  just  a  crack  for  the'occasidnal  executive
prepared  to  battle  for   justice.    That  little  is  too  much   for
Walter,  and  explains  why  he  is  pressing  his  bill  instead.
Sounds  As  If  It's  Time  to  Abolish  the  Supreme Court  as Un-American
"I regret  to  report that  the  forces  of  atheistic  Communism
have  penetrated  the  lines  of  our  defense  on  every  front  and
that  they  are  gnawing  away  at  the  vitals  of  our  Republic.
Time  would  not  permit  me  to  discuss  with  you  all  of  the
fronts   on  which   Communist  subversive   warfare   is   being
waged  in  America.    Let  me,  therefore,  comment  on  a  typical
single  breakthrough  by the  Communist  conspiratorial  forces,
namely,  in the field of  legal  subversion. ...
"The  Smith  Act  .  .  .  has  all  but  been  emasculated   by  the
rSupreme]  Court. ...  In the Kent-Briehl  case  the  Supreme
Court  .  .  .  struck  down  [the  Secretary  of  State's]  authority
to  withhold  passports. ...  In  Greene  v.  McElroy  the  Su-
preme  Court  held  invalid virtually  the  entire  Industrial  Se-
curity  program. ...  In  the  Nelson  case  the  Court   blocked
all   prosecution   of   subversives   under   State  laws.     In   the
Jencks  case  the  Court  ripped  to  shreds  the  protective   secu-
rity  of  FBI reports.  . . .  Yon here  in the  Southland,  perhaps
more  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  country,  have  heard  con-
demnation  of  the  Court  and  its  opinions.     Without  taking
issue  on this  score,  let  me  call  your  attention  to ..."
—Chairman  Walter,  House  Un-American,  getting  American  Legion  Gov.  Washington  award.  New  Orleant,  Feb.  22.
33
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  29, 1960
WMCA  Marks  A  McCarthy  Anniversary  by  Barring  A  McCarthy Victim  From  the  Air
How Lyndon Johnson Looks to Liberals (and From Those Lunch Counters)
From  the  viewpoint  of  the  Northern  liberal,  Lyndon  John-
son  is  making  a  play  for  the  Democratic  nomination  but  will
hold  any  concession  on  Negro voting  rights  to  a  bare, possibly
"meaningless"  minimum.  From  the  viewpoint  of  the  Southern
white  liberal,  however,  Johnson  whatever  his  motives  is  split-
ting  the  solid   South  on  the  race  issue,  giving  leadership   for
the  first  time  to  its  isolated  and  intimidated moderates.    These
moderates  may  not  look  very advanced from  north  of  the  Pa-
tomac,  but  at  least  the   South  that   says  "never"   is  now   no
longer  the  only  South.
From  the  Southern  Negro  point  of  view,  this  is  nonetheless
something  of  a  sham  battle.    What  I  mean  may  be illustrated
by  a  curious  passage  in  that   Associated  Press  story  Feb.  22
from  Hinesville,  Ga., about  Liberty  County,  the  only  one  in
the   South   where  registered  Negro  votes   outnumber  whites.
The  local  NAACP  man  was  quoted  as  saying  that  the  main
ambition  of  Negroes  was  to  obtain  proper  representation.  "He
declined  to  amplify,"   the  AP  said.   What  the  NAACP  man
was afraid  to  say  is that  Negroes  not  only wanted  the  right  to
vote  but  someone  to  vote  for.   In  most  Southern  States,  the
choice  is  so  exclusively  between  two  equally  racist  candidates
that  many  Negroes  see little  point  in  going  through  the risky
business  of  trying  to  cast  a  ballot  for  either  of  them.
More   important   than   the  fight
 (
in   Congress   over   voting
rights  is  the  spreading  revolt  of  Negro  college  youth  against
segregated  lunch  counters.   This  spontaneous  rising  reflects  a
new  Negro  generation  no  longer  willing  to  bow  its  head,  and
determined  to  restore  its  self-respect.  This  as  it  spreads  may
make  the  Congressional  battle  a  white  man's   sideshow.
One Way to  Mark A McCarthy Anniversary
Radio  Station WMCA,  New  York,  chose  a  revealing way  to
celebrate  the  tenth   anniversary  of  McCarthy's  attack  on   the
State  Department  at  Wheeling,  W.  Va.   The  station  cancelled
a  tape  recorded  debate  in  which  Corliss  Lamont  and  William
Rusher  of  The  National   Review  were  to  take  opposite   sides
of  a  program,  "McCarthy  Ten  Years  After—Patriot  or  Dema-
gogue?"    The  participants were  well  chosen  since Mr.  Lamont
Start  of  A  Tour  to  Get  Acquainted
With  Our Latin  American  Neighbors
"The  crowd  at  the  airport  was  small,   no  more  than
several    hundred   people.      [Unfriendly     demonstrators
were  kept  behind  the  airport  where  Ike  could  not   see
them.]   For  security   reasons—the   Secret   Service   was
unhappy  about  the  entire  Puerto   Rico  stop—the  Presi-
dent   skipped   any  appearance  outside  the   airport  and
any  procession  into  San  Juan.   Instead,  after  a  brief  10-
minute  private  talk  with  [Governor]   Munoz,  he  took  off
again  in  his  big  MATS  jet  to  spend  the  afternoon  and
night  at  Kamey  some  90  miles  away.   There  he  put  in
some  practice  time  on  the  golf  course  and  gave  a  small
reception  for  top  military  brass.  .  .  ."
—Wall  Street  Journal, from  San Juan, Feb. 23.
is  one  of  the  lew  who  pleaded   the  First  Amendment  before
the  McCarthy  committee  and  won  in  the  courts  while  Mr.
Rusher   was  himself   assistant  counsel  of   the   Senate  Internal
Security  Committee and  the  weekly  of  which  he  is  publisher
speaks  i'or rightists.    The  station  did  not  object  to  having  a
right  winger  defend  McCarthy;  R.  Peter   Straus,  the  station's
president,  objected  that Mr.  Lamont was top  "closely  identified
with  Left  wing  causes."    The  incident shows  how  McCarthy-
ism  and  the  fear  of  it  linger  on.
P.S.  McCarthy's friend  and  collaborator, Robert  E.  Lee, has
just  been  reappointed  by  the  President  to  another  seven  year
term  as  Federal  Communications Commissioner.
A  cheering passage  in  the  recent  District  of  Columbia  Bar
Association  debate  on  passport   legislation   deserves  preserva-
tion.    "Heat  was  provided  for  the  debate,"   the    Washington
Star  reported  (Feb. 10)   "by  Attorney  Culver  13.  Chamberlain,
former   State  Department   foreign  service   officer.     The Gov-
ernment   bureaucracy,   said   he,  unfortunately  includes   'fools,
bigots  and  scoundrels' who  help  determine who  gets  passports.
The  Chamberlains,  he  said,  had  been  in  the  United  States  for
several  generations and,  he  added,  'When  I  get  ready  to  get
out  I don't want  some bureaucrat to  stand  in  the  way.' "
Are  There  "Live  Wires"  Around  Who  Would  Do  A  Telephone  Campaign  in  Their  Communities  to  Get  Us  Subs?
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ......................................................................... ...............
Street   ......................................................................................
City ........................................Zone............State....................
*                                                                                        2/29/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  Q    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   P.   Stone'8   Weekly.    Entered'  as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pnb-
IJgbed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  5018  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:
K   In  tbe  II   S  •  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED