I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960mar21.pdf

============================================================

Chilean  Appeal  to Ike,  P.  3
17  Science  Advisors  to  Democratic  Council  Say  Underground  Test  Detection  Feasible,  See  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  11
MARCH  21,  1960
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Feeble,  Tricky  and  Transparent
The  "working paper on  general disarmament"  released by the
State  Department  on  the  eve  of  the  Geneva  arms  talk  is  dis-
appointing  in manner and  substance.   As  against Khrushchev's
reverberating  proposal  at  the  UN  General  Assembly for  total
disarmament  in  four  years,  we  turn  up  a  half  year  later  with
a  "position  paper"  so  vague  and  complicated  no  one  can  tell
what  it  means  until   after   months  of   negotiation.    Even  an
illiterate  Hottentot   in  darkest  Africa  will  find  no  difficulty   in
getting  Khrushchev's  message—no  more  armies  in  jour  years.
To  understand  ours, one  would  have  to  hire Sullivan &  Crom-
well.    Khrushchov's  offer  of  total  disarmament  may  have  been
Utopian  but  it  had  drama.   Ours  will  put  to  sleep  any audience
patient  enough  to  listen  through  it.    From  the  standpoint  of
the  merchandising arts  in  which  we  claim  pre-eminence,  this
is  a  dismal  flop.
Slowly  Progressing   Backwards
As  substance,  it  is  little better.    It  is  an  improvement  over
the  1957  "package  plan"  of  John  Foster  Dulles  in  that  it  does
not  tie  all  the   issues  together   in  an  inextricable  "take   it  or
leave  it"   knot;  it   does  not   depend   on  unspecified   political
solutions;  it  does  not  "forbid"   the  spread  of  nuclear  arms  to
allies  except   for   "defensive"   purposes!    This  new  plan,   if
vaguer,   is  also  roomier   in  the  area  allowed  for  negotiation.
But  in  other  respects,  it  represents  a  step  backward.    Let  us
take  the  simple  issue  of  the  size  of  the  armed  forces.    Eight
years  ago,   in   May   1952,  we   began   by  proposing   a   ceiling
of  not  more  than  1,500,000  men  each  for  the  armed   forces
of  the  U.S.,  the  U.S.S.R.  and  China.    Now  we  propose   force
level  ceilings  of  2.5  million  for  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  and
a  later  reduction  to  2.1  millions.   When  we  phoned  the  Pen-
tagon   to  ask  for  the  latest  figure  on  the  U.S.  armed  forces,
the  reply  was  2,490,035.     So  we  could  hire  9,965  more  sol-
diers  under  the first  stage  of  this  disarmament  plan!   Khrush-
chov,  by  comparison,  offered   a  first  stage  reduction   for   the
Big  Three  to   1.7  million  men   each.    After  all  these  years
of   claiming  that   we  had   to  have  nuclear   arms  to  counter-
balance   Soviet   armed   "hordes,"   and   insisting   that   conven-
tional   forces   must   be  cut  first   before   we  could   "ban    the
bomb,"  we're  talking  of  bigger  armies  than  the  Russians.
More  Inspection  Than  Disarmament
The  new  proposals  are   framed   to   combine   a   maximum
of   inspection  with  a  minimum  of   disarmament:   the   former
is  to  come  early,  the  latter  is  left  to  the  sweet   bye-and-bye.
This   is  most   striking   in   the   question   of   missiles.     These
represent  the  greatest  immediate  danger  to  ourselves   as  well
as  the  Russians.    In  March   1957  they  for  the  first  time  of-
fered   total   abolition   of   all   missiles,  intercontinental,  inter-
mediate  and  short  range,  coupling  "complete   prohibition  of
atomic  and   hydrogen   weapons"   with   "all   types  of   rockets
and  artillery"  which  could  be  fitted  with  nuclear   warheads.
This  proposal  was  included  in  Khrushchov's  speech  last  Fall,
and   the  Russians  offered   measures  of  inspection  and   control
to  police  such  an  agreement.    But  our  plan  calls  in  an  early
stage  for  the  Russians  to  disclose  their  missile  launching sites
to  an  International Disarmament  Organization  with   "on-site
inspection  of  launching  sites,"  but  it  leaves  the  question  of
eliminating   nuclear   weapons   and   delivery   systems   to   the
last   stage—the   stage   jokingly   referred   to   in   official   circles
here,  as  "millennial."   Even  as  to  this  millennium,  the   pro-
posal  is  vague.    It  speaks  of  prohibiting   the  production   of
"nuclear,   chemical,   biological   and   other   weapons   of   mass
destruction"  but  not  of  prohibiting  their  use.    It  speaks  am-
biguously  of  "control   of  the  production  of  agreed   categories
of  military  missiles  .  .  .  and  their  final  elimination."    But  if
we  want  to  eliminate  them,  why  control?     And   why  only
"certain  categories"?     No   time  limit  is  set  for  the   various
stages.    It  might  be  years  before  "control"  followed   inspec-
tion,  and  years  more  before  "elimination"  followed  control.
Asking  the  Russians   to  Buy  A  Pig  In  A  Poke
The  Russians  have  always  coupled  the  ICBM  with  our  for-
eign  bases:  if  they  give  up  the  power  to  bomb  us  from  afar,
they  want  us  to  give  up  our  power  to  bomb  them  from  near-
by.    This  plan  says  nothing  of  bases.    Nor   does  it  mention
inspection   or  control   of  other  nuclear   weapon   delivery  sys-
tems  such  as  jet   bombers  and   Polaris-armed   submarines  in
which  we may  be ahead.    The  Russians would  be  asked  to dis-
close  their  missile  bases  but  with  no  assurance that  both  sides
would  give  up  nuclear  missiles.    "In   the  military  domain,"
says  the  report   of  the   Scientific  Advisory  Committee  of   the
Democratic  Advisory  Council  released  last  Monday  (see  page
2),   "the   Soviet  Union  has  a  priceless   advantage  in  the   con-
cealment  of  its  missile  bases.    Any  uncertainty  in  the  exact  lo-
cation  of  missile  bases  adds  a high  degree  of  invulnerability  to
them.   This  is of  immense  value  to  the  Soviets  and  must  give
them  confidence  that  the  U.S.  will  not  strike  the  first  blow."
If  the  positions  were  reversed,  we  would  not  give  up  such  an
asset  without  being  certain  of  a  compensatory  concession.    We
ask  for  the  location  of  missile  bases  first,  but  leave  the  elimi-
nation  of  nuclear  missiles  vague,  though  we  have  as  much  to
gain  from  this  as  the  Russians.   This  feeble  and  transparent
dodge  reflects the thinking  of  military men who (I)  don't  like
disarmament  anyway,  (2)   act  as  if  we  still  had  a  nuclear  mo-
nopoly  and  (3)   fail  to  realize  that  eliminating  the  ICBM  and
other  nuclear  delivery  systems  is  now  essential  to  our  safety
and  the  world's.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  SI,  I960
Teller  "Big Hole"  Theory  Called  Impractical  As  Means  for  Evading  Detection
Enforcible  Atom  Test  Ban  Feasible  Say Democratic  Scientific  Advisers
The  Committee  on  Science  and  Technology   of  the  Demo-
cratic  Advisory  Council  performed  a  public  service  on  the  eve
of  the  resumed  Geneva  arms  talks  last  week  when  it  released
a  6,000-word   report  declaring  an  enforcible  ban  on  nuclear
tests  feasible.    The   17  signers*  included  Harold   C.  Urey,  a
Nobel  prize  winning  atomic  scientist  and  Trevor  Gardner,  a
former  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  in  the  Elsenhower  Ad-
ministration.    Highlights  of  the  report:
1.  By using  robot  monitors  to  provide  a grid  of  seismic sta-
tions  250  miles  apart,  it  would  be  possible  to  detect  nuclear
explosions  down  to  3  kilotons  even  if  muffled   by  detonating
them  in  underground   excavations.
2.  This  closer  spacing  would  make  possible  "more  precise
location  of  seismic  signal  origins",  limiting  the  total  area  to
be  studied  by  on-site  inspection  teams.
Thirty  Inspections  a  Year  Suggested
3.  "Given  the  closer  grid  spacing  the  number  of  on-site in-
spections  required  per  year  need  not  be  large,  perhaps  30  per
year,  particularly if  a  somewhat  larger  number  of  aerial  inspec-
tions  are  permitted."
4.  The  present  U.S. proposal  to  allow  testing  underground
"suffers  from  two  major  faults:  It  does  not  prevent  the  spread
of  tested  weapons  to  other  powers."    "By stipulating a  thres-
hold  of  4.75 on  the  seismic  magnitude  scale  without  specifica-
tion   of   the  maximum  allowable   yield  for  weapons  tested,"
the  U.S. "could,  through  the  use  of  muffling  techniques,   test
weapons  up  to  100  kilotons  without  violating  the  threshold."
5.  Muffling  by  explosion  in  large  underground  cavities  re-
duces  the  seismic  signal  but  is  not  a  "practical  method"  of
evading  test  detection.    A  70  kiloton  explosion  would  require
a  2  to  4  year  excavation  program   cost  $25  to  $50   million
and  easily  detectable  in  advance.
6.  As for  smaller  muffled  explosions,  "In  most circumstances
an  explosion  of  1  ton  of  TNT  (1/3  kiloton  with  maximum
decoupling)   usually  yields  an  ample  seismic  signal  out  to  a
distance  of   400  kilometers  [250 miles].     An   explosion   of
ten  tons  [3  kilotons]  is  detectible with  high  reliability  within
this  distance."
* The   other   signers  were:  Dr.  Ernest   C.  Pollard,   chairman,   bio-
physics,  Yale;   Dr.   Richard   B.   Roberts,   vice   chairman,   terrestrial'
magnetism,   Carnegie  Foundation;   Dr.   Samuel   K.  Allison,  physics,
Univ.  of  Chicago;  Dr.  Harrison   Brown,  geochemistry,  Caltech;  Dr.
James  F.  Crow,  genetics,  Univ.  of  Wis.;  Dr.  Louis  B.  Flexner,  medi-
cine,  Univ.  of  Fa.;  Dr.  H.  Bentley  Glass,  biology,  Johns  Hopkins;  Dr.
Leslie  C.  Dnnn,  zoology,  Columbia;  Dr.  David  B.  Ooddard,  biology,
Univ.  of  Pa.;  Dr.  Frank  Ooddard,  jet  propulsion,  Caltech;  Dr.  David
Li.  Hill,  physics,  New  York;  Dr.  Folykarp  Knsch,  physics,  Columbia;
Dr.  F.  T.  McClnre,  physics,  Johns  Hopkins;  Dr.  John  S.  Toll,  physics,
Univ.  of  Md.;  Dr.  Gilbert  F.  White,  geography,   Univ.  Chicago.
The  More  Arms  the  More  Insecurity
"Never  have  the  peoples  of  the  world  spent  so  much
on  armament  in  time  of   peace  and  never   have   they
been  so  insecure.   .  .  .  The  survival  of  civilization  re-
quires  the  control  of  armaments.  .  .  .  Insistence  upon  a
perfect   system   only  insures  that  there   will  be  no  in-
spection  and no  control.  .  .  .  The  American  and  Soviet
positions  on  a  test  ban  are  now  very  close  as  a  result
of  mutual  concessions.    Any  resolution   of  the  remain-
ing   differences   is   preferable   to   the   dangers   which
would  follow  a  breakdown  of  negotiations.     The U.S.
and  the  Soviet   Union  have  a  strong   common  interest
in  preventing  the  spread   of  nuclear  weapons.     Recent
Administration    suggestions    that    such    weapons    be
furnished   to   American  allies   would   .   .  .   jeopardize
further  negotiations   .  .  .  the  U.S. should,  if  necessary,
accept   considerable  risks  to  achieve  the   goal   of  gen-
eral   disarmament   in   order   to   avoid   the   far   greater
risks  attendant  upon  continuing  the  arms  race."
—Telegram  to  Secretary  Herter  signed  by  106  mem-
bers  of  Johns  Hopkins  and  Goucher  Faculties, Mar.  12.
7.  "It   is  not  necessary  for  the  U.S. to  insist  upon   a  100
percent  foolproof   system  designed  to  be  certain  of   detecting
any  nuclear   explosion,   however   small.     It  is  important   that
significant  test  series  would  be  likely  to  be  detected.   In  other
words,   it   is  necessary  that  there   be   no   certain   method   of
defeating  the  system."
8.  "There  is  a  penalty  attached  to  a  test  ban  violator   in
the   form  of  world   opinion  which  would   turn   against   any
nation  found  guilty  of  breaking  the  nuclear  agreement.    The
latter  will  be  no  ordinary  agreement.     It  will   symbolize  a
veritable  turning  point  in  history ...  A  nation  which  violates
such   an  agreement  automatically  sets   into  motion   an   arms
race  from   which  there  may  never   be  an  end.   The   notion
that  a  nation  could  gain  some  momentary  advantage  in   the
arms  race  by  a  quick  series  of  tests  is  fanciful.     It  takes  years
to  convert  test  data  on  weapon  innovations into  the  stockpiled
weapons of  war."
9.  "A   test  ban  does  not  mean  stagnation   in  weapon   de-
sign ...  an  enforcible  test  ban  could  give  some  advantage
to   the   U.S.  because   of   its   greater   experience   in   nuclear
weapons."
10.  "At   best  an   arms  race  promises   nothing   more   than
a  temporary  respite ...  a  super-arms  race  takes  humanity
on  a  course  beset  with  calamitous  pitfalls,  unsightly   detours
and  genocidal  cul-de-sacs  .  .  .  Real  security  requires   control
of   armaments."
Text  of  Adlai  Stevenson  Statement  Opposing Resumption  of  Nuclear  Tests
"The   recent   proposal   by   some   of   our  leaders  that   the
U.S.    resume    underground    nuclear   tests,   just   when   the
first   break  in  the  arms   deadlock   seems  possible,   shocked
me.    I  can  think  of  few  better  ways  to  chill  the  prospects,
deface   our  peaceful  image   and  underscore   the   Communist
propaganda   that   they   are   the   peacemakers   and  we   the
warmongers.
"We  should   extend  our  test  suspension  so  long  as  nego-
tiations   continue   in   good   faith   and  Russia   maintains   a
similar   suspension.    I   am  confident   that   some,   at  least,
of   the   Russian   leaders   are   anxious   to  halt   testing  and
development    of   nuclear   weapons    before   the   danger   be-
comes   even   more   uncontrollable.    The   good   faith   of   the
negotiations  is,  of  course,  decisive  because  indefinite   sus-
pension   amounts   to  a  test  ban  without  inspection.
"There  are  those  who  say   that   disarmament   is   impos-
sible   until   political   settlements   have   been   reached   and
confidence   restored.     I   disagree.     I   believe   the   nuclear
arms   race   with   weapons   of   mass   destruction   is   a  new
element   and  in  itself   a  cause  of  tension.    Fear  will   not
vanish  until  the  arms  race  is  arrested."
—Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists,  March,  1960.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  21,1960
Latin  American  "Social  Order"  A  Little  Island  of  Great  Wealth  in  A  Vast  Sea  of  Misery
The  Appeal  Addressed  to  Eisenhower  by  the  Chilean  Student  Federation
Except  for  a  story  by  Murray  Marder  in  the  Washing-
ton  Post  March  8,  little  attention  has  been  paid  by  the
U.S.   press  to  the  appeal  addressed  to  the  President  by
the  Student   Federation  of  Chile  when  he  visited  Santiago
Feb.   24.    It  is  an  eloquent  and  memorable  document,  a
cry  for  understanding  from  our  neighbors  to  the  South.
We  present  a  slightly  abridged  version  of  the  text  here
this   week.     We  will   publish  the  concluding  section,  on
Castro's  Cuba,  next  week.
"Welcome  to  Chile.    Please  accept  the  cordial  greeting  of
the   25,000  students  in  the  seven  Chilean   universities.    We
the  University leaders  have  been  elected  in  a  direct  vote,  both
free  and  secret,  and  represent  all  political  groups.    The  ma-
jority  of  us  are  Christians.    And  almost  all  of  us,  Christians
and   free-thinkers,  are  firm  supporters   of   democracy  and   in
opposition  to  all  types  of  dictatorship.     Permit  us,  then,   to
express  with  friendship  our  thinking  on   some  fundamental
aspects  of  U.S.  relations with  Latin America.
A  One-Sided  Partnership
"The  relationship between  the  U.S.  and  the  20 Latin Amer-
ican  nations  is  framed   by  a  group  of  treaties.    What  is  the
deep  political  'philosophy'  inspiring  all  of  these  agreements?
One   is  very  clear:   To   establish  by   legal   obligation,   Latin
American  solidarity  with  the  U.S.    In  no  other   [of  its  inter-
national  arrangements]   does  the  U.S.  obtain  more  advantages,
at  the   same  time  acquiring  fewer   obligations.    The   Inter-
American  system  is  a  regime  of  obligations  accepted  by   the
weak  in  favor  of  the  strong,  and  the  poor  in  favor  of  the  rich.
"What  can  be  done?    Recpirocity   and  not  aid  should   be
the   moral   basis  of   the   Inter-American  System   and   should
materialize  in  three  fundamental ways:
"(1)     Military  security  within  the  continent by other  means
than   the   armed  forces   (more  than   $1.5   billions  each  year
are  spent   by  these  countries  guarding  themselves  from   one
another).
"(2)    Promotion  of  democracy.   Denying  'salt  and  water'
to  -the  dictators  and  tyrants  in  power   (such  as  Trujillo,  So-
moza  and   Stroessner)   instead  of  making  easy  for   them   the
exploitation   of   their   peoples   under   the   pretense  that   they
are  'friends'   of  the   U.S.  and  'enemies'  of   'communism.'
"(3)    An  economic  integration  of  Latin  America that  will
permit   these   countries  to   industrialize  their  economies   and
accelerate  their   development.
"In   none  of  these  three  fundamental  points  has  the   U.S.
assumed  the  initiative,  nor  lent  its  collaboration.    This  is  in
sharp  contrast  with  the  vigor  of  the  initiative  for  the  work
in  Europe—the  Marshall  Plan,  NATO,  etc.
"Just   prices  and  moral  basis  for   exchange.
"The   gap  that  separates  the  industrial  countries  from  the
nations  producing  raw  materials  widens  more  each  year.   In-
dustrial  nations  continue  increasing their  capital  at  the  expense
of  under-developed  countries,  and  [their  policies]  are  directed
toward  'obtaining  foreign   raw  materials  at  the  lowest  price
possible'   (Pelley  Report,  1952).
"If  our  capitalization  cannot  base  itself  on  the   exploitation
of   other   countries,  as  was  the  case  with   Europe   for   4  cen-
turies,  and  it  cannot  be  based  on  the  unmerciful  exploitation
At  Least Marie  Antoinette   Offered    Cake
Leader  of  the  World's  Best  Fed
Takes  Heartening  Spiritual
Message  to  the  Hungry
"Two-thirds   of  the  population  (120  million)  live  in  a
chronic  state  of  malnutrition ...  it  is  a  mockery  to
pretend  that  this  situation  reflects  the  Christian  or  dem-
ocratic  order  for  which  the  immense  mass  of  starved,
illiterate   and  uncultured   people,   lacking  rights,   free-
dom  and property,  the  majority  of  Latin  America,  could
hope."
—Chilean Student  Appeal  to Ike,  Santiago, Feb.  24-
"You  and  I  believe  that  each  of  us  is  an  inviolable
spiritual  entity  .  .  .  more  devoted  to  the  protection  of
human   dignity  and  love  of  God  than  to  the  mere  ac-
quisition  of  material  things.  .  .  .  Faced  with  no  other
choice,  we  would  choose  poverty  in  freedom  rather  than
prosperity  in  slavery."
—Ike  at  Sao  Paolo, Brazil, luncheon Feb. 25.
of  our  own  people  as  the  communist  alternative demands,  the
moral  solution  demands  that  it  be  the  product  of  just  prices
and  adequate  remuneration  for  the  raw  materials  we  sell.
A  Social  Order  Not  Worth  Defending
"In   the   U.S.   and   in  Western   Europe,   it  makes   sense   to
fight  to  defend   the   'prevailing  order,'   because  there   social
order   represents  values  which  are  shared   by  everybody.    In
Latin  America  to  'defend  the  prevailing  order'  means  main-
taining  the  privileges  of  a  thin  layer  of  the  population   sur-
rounded   by  an  ocean  of   poor  people. for   whom   the   'social
order'  means  little  or  literally  nothing.
"Two   thirds  of  the  population   (120   millions)   live  in  a
chronic  state  of  malnutrition  (FAO);  two  out  of  five  Latin
Americans   (70   million)    are   illiterate   (UNESCO);   Latin
America  has  the  lowest  rate  of  economic  development  in  the
Western   World   (1%   a   year   per   capita),   or   an   average
income  of  only  U.S.  $275  per  annum  (ECLA).
"If   trees  are  known  by  their  fruit,  it  is  a  mockery  to  pre-
tend  that  this  situation  reflects  the  Christian   or  the   Demo-
cratic  order.     It  is  a  crime  against  the  spirit.     If  the  injus-
tices   of   today   are   all   that   Christianity   or   democracy   can
offer   this  continent,  no  one  should   be  surprised  if   the   best
.  children  of  these  nations turn  toward communism.
The  True  Face  of  Our Favorites
"It  is  true  that  the  U.S.  apparently  finds  its  'best  friends'
in  the  small  group  of  privileged   Latin  Americans  to   whom
the   'prevailing  order'   in  this  starved  and   illiterate  America
means  the  right  to  enjoy  a  standard  of  living  which  would
be  envied   by  the   multi-millionaires   of   the   U.S.     But   they
are  not  friends  of  the  U.S.;  they  are  the  friends  of  their  own
privileges.
"Mr.   President:  We   think   that  the  great   mission   of   the
U.S.  in  Latin  America  is  not  to  become  involved  in  the  'de-
fense  of  the  prevailing  order'  but  rather   [to]    encourage  by
all  legitimate   means   those  who  fight  for   the   creation   of  a
new  social  order,   closer  to  Lincoln's  immortal   definition,   'a
government  of the people, by the people, and for the people.' "
4   5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  21, 1960
New  AEC  Commissioner   Prepared   to  Resume  Testing:  But  No  Witness  Protests
What's  the  Good  of  Public  Hearings  If  The  Public  Doesn't   Participate?
What's   the  good  of  public  heatings   if  the  public  doesn't
take  advantage  of  them?    The  Joint   Committee  on  Atomic
Energy  has  just  held  a  hearing  on  the  nomination  of  Robert
E.  Wilson,   retired   Standard   Oil   (Indiana)   executive   to  a
five  year  term  on  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.    None  of
the   organizations   interested   in   the   crucial  public   questions
he  will   pass   upon   showed   up   to   testify.
Wilson   was  questioned  by  Senator  Anderson  about  the  let-
ter,  "Fallout  Alarm  Unfounded,"   he  sent  the  Chicago  Daily
News  last May  (as  disclosed  in the  Weekly,  March  7.)  Wilson
indicated  that  he  thinks  the  fallout  danger   exaggerated   and
would  be prepared  to  resume testing in  the  atmosphere  though
"anything   more   than   20   to   25  percent   of   the   past  rate,"
Wilson  said,  "we  would  have  to  look  at  carefully."
Letters  questioning  the  Wilson   appointment  on  the  basis
of  the  views  he  expressed  in  the  Chicago  Daily  News  were
received   by  the   committee   from   Dr.   Maurice  B.   Visscher,
Univ.  of  Minn.  physiologist, and  Dr.  Hugh  C. Wolfe,  Cooper
Union  physicist,  but  they  were  not  read  nor  were  copies  made
available  to  the  press  at  the  hearing.    Both  urged  the  need
for  a  biologist  on  the  AEC.    The  Joint  Committee  in  execu-
tive   session   afterward    voted   unanimously  to   approve    the
nomination.     It   now   goes   to   the   Senate   for    confirmation
where   it  will  probably  be  voted  with  the  routine  dispatch
of   a  country  postmastership.
The  Un-Americans:  Hat's  Off  to  The  New   Yorter (Mar.
12)  for  a  cartoon  by Stevenson  showing  a  pompous  Air  Force
officer   shaking  hands  with  a  startled  Minister  as  the  crowd
pours  out  of  church,  with  the  caption  "Good  sermon,  Rever-
end.    I'm  going  to  spread  the  word  around  my  airbase  that
in  my  humble  opinion  you're  not  one  of  those   Communists."
Granted  that  the  Air  Force  has  a  right  to  protect  its  installa-
tions  against  espionage  and   sabotage,   what   business   has   it
policing  churches  or  schools   against   "dangerous    thoughts"?
Another  First  Amendment defendant,  Richard  Yellin,  grad-
uate  fellow  at   the   University   of   Illinois,   was   sentenced   to
the  maximum  one  year  in   jail   for   contempt   of   the   House
Un-American   Activities  Committee   in   Chicago   by   Federal
Press  Time   Bulletin
A  project  designed  further  to  poison  the  atmosphere
of   the  Geneva  test  talks  has  just  been  announced  by
the  AEC.    It  has  launched  a  one-year  $1  million  con-
struction  job  to  test   a  10  kiloton  nuclear  device  in  a
tunnel   1,100  feet  long   at   the  bottom  of   a   1200  foot
shaft  in  salt  beds  near  Carlsbad,  New  Mexico.   "Proj-
ect  Gnome",  planned  by  Dr.  Teller's  Livermore  lab,  is
presented  as  part  of  the  Plowshare  project  for peaceful
uses  but  this  looks  more  like  a  test  of  the  Teller  "big
hole"  theory.    Until  now,  in  the  Louisiana  salt   mines,
the  largest   test   has  been   a  2,000  pound  non-nuclear
shot   or  2-kilotons.    Final  authorization  by  the   Presi-
dent  will  be  required,  however, before actual detonation
and  we  hope  it  will  not  be  forthcoming.    There  is  no
sure  way  of  separating  so-called peacetime  uses  from
data  useful   for  war.
Judge  Swygert  .  .  .  Petitions   for   certiorari  in  the   cases  of
Frank  Wilkinson  and  Carl  Braden  were  filed  in  the  Supreme
Court  last  week.    The   issues  involve  the  right  of  the  Com-
mittee  to  punish-by-subpoena  those  who  have  been  working
for   its  abolition.     Richard  Arens,  staff   director  of   the   Com-
mittee,  accused  Wilkinson  at   his  trial  of   trying  to  develop
"a  hostile  sentiment"  to   the  Committee.    This   sounds  like
luse  nuijesle   in  a  new   form.
Warren  Unna  in  the   Washington    Post   (March   13) dis-
closed  that  Arens  has  been  getting  $3,000   a  year  as  adviser
to  New  York  millionaire  Wycliffe  Draper  in  financing  genet-
ics studies  designed  to  prove  Negro  inferiority.    Unna  pointed
out  that  the  Ea  Follette-Monroney  Act  of  1946  says   "profes-
sional    staff    members"   of   Congressional   committees   "shall
not   engage   in   any   work   other   than   committee    business."
Chairman  Walter  backed  up  Arens,  declaring  "activities  after
business  hours  are  generally  considered  to  be  nobody's   busi-
ness"   and   Speaker  Rayburn   told   Ronald   W.   May   of   the
York,  Pa.,  Gazelle  and  the  Madison,  Wis.,    Capitol-Times,
who  first  broke  the  Arens  story,  that  private  employment  was
only  improper  if   "in   any  way  connected   with  legislation."
Neither  interpretation is  in  accord  with  the  law.
Thanks   for   the   Many   Kind   Notes   With  Renewals—They   Are   Deeply    Appreciated
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   .....................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State...................'.
3/21/00
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  moa.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ..............................,.........Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?           Yes  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I     F    Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   »t   Washington.   D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1S79.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pah
llxheil  ever;  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  5618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.  W..  Washington  15.  D.  C.
An    Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:   Circulation   Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription-
Is  In  the  r.  S.:  M  In  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   ran.*:  Iir.  to  Europe:  *20  to  Israel.  A8l«  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED