I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960apr18.pdf

============================================================

UA Ws  Mazey  on Foreign  Policy,  P.  3
Hopeful  Stirrings  of  Revolt  on  the  Peace  Front  Within  the  Democratic  Party,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VIII,  NO.  15
APRIL   18,  1960
°
10
'     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Moscow  Trying to Keep  Peking Out  of the Nuclear Club
A  courageous speech  on  "American  Policy Toward  Commu-
nist  China"  was made by Senator  Joseph  S. Clark  (D.  Pa.)  be-
fore  the  American Academy of  Political  and  Social  Science  in
Philadelphia   April   8,   and   generally   ignored   by  the   press
though   it  contained  two  striking  items  of   news.   One   was
Senator   Clark's  disclosure  that  when  he  inquired  the   State
Department  had  advised him  "that  in  the  97  meetings  held  in
Warsaw   between   our   Ambassador,   Jacob   D.    Beam,   and
Chinese   Communist   Ambassador   Wong   Ping    Nan    since
August  1,  1955,   China's  participation  in  a  nuclear  test  ban
control  system  or  in  general  disarmament  accords  has  never
been  discussed"  although  23  of  the  37  control  posts  to  be  lo-
cated  in  Asia under  the  1958  Geneva  test  agreement  are  to  be
located  on  the  China  mainland.   Senator   Clark  pointed   out
that  "if  the  Soviets  agree  to  the  US-UK   draft  provisions,  a
start  on  the  establishment of  control  posts  in  countries  such  as
China which  are  'adjacent  or  contiguous'  to the  territory  of  the
signatory  powers  will   be  required  within  two  years  of   the
treaty."   He  urged  that  we  use  the  Warsaw  talks,  or  prefer-
ably  new  contacts  at  a  higher   level,   to  sound  out   Chinese
views  and  in  addition  place the  question  on  the  agenda  of  the
summit conference.
Advanced  Reactors  Refused  by   Russia
The  speech  also  contained  a  related   but  more   sensational
item  of   news.   "There  is  little  to   indicate,"   Senator   Clark
said,  "that  the  Soviet  Union  is anxious  to  have  its  Communist
partner   join  the   nuclear   club.   True,   in   1955,   the   Soviets
signed  an  agreement  with  the  Chinese  on  scientific  and  tech-
nical  cooperation,  but  it  is  now  established  that  the  Russians
have   refused    recent  Chinese  requests  for   advanced   reactors
and   other  nuclear  materials  necessary   to   speed   the   Chinese
nuclear  development  program."   (Our   italics.)
The  Senator  did  not  amplify this  information  in  his  speech.
All  his  office  would  say was  that  it  had  come  from  official  U.S.
sources.   In  tracking  it  down,  I  obtained  more  details  but  I
cannot  disclose  their  source  other  than  to  say  that  earlier  in
the   week  there  became  available  in   Congressional    circles  a
study  for  intelligence   purposes   into  the  nuclear  relations  be-
tween  Moscow  and  Peking.   This  turned  up  no  evidence  that
Moscow  was  sharing  nuclear  weapons  or  passing  along  weap-
ons  technology   to  Peking.   On  the  contrary,  it  was  learned
that  in  April   1958   a  Chinese   Communist   delegation   offered
cash  in  full  payment  for  a  power  reactor  in  Moscow  and  was
told   there   were   none   available.     Soviet   reluctance   to   see
Peking  emerge  as  a  nuclear   power  was  also  seen  in  a  state-
ment  made  by Mikoyan  Feb.  13  to  a  Norwegian  Students  As-
sociation  meeting   in  Oslo.   "We   wish   to  forbid   all   atomic
tests,"  Mikoyan  said.   "If  there  will  be  no  agreement  on  this,
China  may have atomic weapons.  The  sooner we get  an  agree-
ment,  the  greater  are  the  chances  that  there  will  be  no  more
explosions."
Peking   Cool  to  "Atom  Free"  Pacific
The  same  study  showed  that  Peking  has  been  cool  to  the
idea  of  an  "atom  free  zone"  for  the  Pacific.   This  originated
with  a  Japanese  socialist  at  the  Afro-Asian  solidarity  confer-
ence   at   Cairo   in   December,   1957.    The   idea  was  warmly
greeted   by  virtually  all   the   delegations   present   except   the
Chinese  Communists.   Pravda, in  its  report  on  the  conference,
featured   prominently   the   idea   of   the   atom   free   zone   but
Peking  throughout  1958  treated  it with  reserve and  ambiguity.
Khrushchov  told  the  21st  Party  Congress  in  January  1959   "a
zone  of  peace,  above  all  an  atom-free  zone,  can  and  must  be
created  in  the  Far  East  and  the  entire  Pacific  basin."   An  atom
free   Far  East  implies  that  neither  Peking   nor  Tokyo   would
have  atomic  arms.   Chou  En-lai  was  present  but  ignored  this
suggestion.   Only  once  during  1959  did  a  high  Chinese   offi-
cial  endorse  the  Khrushchov proposal,  but  that  was  in  a Soviet
not  a  Chinese  journal.   More  recently  Chou  En-lai  did  give
some  support  to  the  idea  of  an  atom  free  zone  to  cover  all
East  Asia  and  the  Pacific.   But  Peking  has  made  no  commit-
ment  to  deny  itself  the  possession  and  use  of  nuclear  weapons
irrespective   of  Moscow's  desires.   The  evidence  indicates   that
Peking's  attitude  is  much  like  de  Gaulle's—it  wants  an  inde-
pendent  nuclear  capability  to  increase  its  weight  in  the  world
balance  of  power.   Moscow  seems  as  unwilling  to  see  China
emerge  from  a  safely  junior  role  as we  are  to  see this  happen
with  de  Gaulle.   The  evidence  indicates that  China  can  with-
out  Russian  help   produce   enough   plutonium  for   a  nuclear
device  from  its  present  reactor  within  two  to  four  years  but
at  the  expense  of  diversified  experimental  and  scientific train-
ing  use  of  the  scarce  material.
A  Common Russo-American  Interest
When  that  first  Chinese  nuclear  device  is  exploded,  it  will
mean  new  headaches  in  Washington  and  Moscow.   The  For-
mosan  question  will  take  on  a  new  virulence.   For   Moscow,
Mao  Tse-tung  will  become  a  Tito  and  a  de  Gaulle  rolled  into
one,  and   several   times  magnified.   The   two   nuclear  giants
have  a  common   interest   in  preventing   the   emergence   of   a
third,  potentially  greater,  rival.    It  is  in  the  shadow  of  this
new  peril  that  Senator  Clark  warned  that  our  China  policy
has   become   obsolete.    "A   political   lag   between   established
policies  and  the  needs  of  the  day,"  he  told  the  Academy,  "is
always  dangerous.   When  there  is  a  clear  challenge  in  a  field
affecting  national  safety  and  survival  and  there  are  literally  no
government  policies  to  meet  that  challenge,  it  is   frightening."
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  18,1960
Hopeful  Developments   on  the  Peace  Front  Within  the  Democratic  Party
Fulbright  Says  Senate  Could  Confirm  Nuclear  Testing  Treaty  by  July
Beside  the  Clark  speech  discussed  on  page  one, we  report a
number  of  hopeful  developments which  show a growing revolt
within  the  Democratic party against the  stale cold  war postures
of  the  Truman-Acheson  leadership:
1.  Senator  Fulbright   (D.  Ark.),  chairman  of  the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee,  rose  in  the  Senate  April  6  to
assure  the  President that  if  a  treaty  banning  nuclear  tests  were
agreed  upon  at  the  summit  in  May  "it  could  be  acted  upon  by
the  Senate  by  early  July".  Senator  Fulbright  said  that  the  ad-
vantage  of  early  action  would  be  to  take  the  issue  out  of  the
campaign  and  give  the  new  President  "a  firm  basis" on  which
to  continue efforts  toward  disarmament.*
Proxmire  Against  Nuclear  Give-Away
2.  Senator  Proxmire  (D.  Wis)   has  introduced  in  the Sen-
ate  the  Kowalski  resolution  for  four  power  negotiations  (US,
Soviet,  British  and  French)  to prohibit  the  transfer  of  nuclear
weapons  or  secrets  to  other  nations.  This  resolution  now  has
18 sponsors  in  the  House,  all  Democrats.  The  four  new  ones
since our earlier  report (Weekly,  Mar. 14)  are Vanik  (Ohio),
Harmon  (/»</),  Karth  (Minn)   and  McGovern   (S.Dak).
3.  Although  the  President  is  for  an  agreement  to  end  test-
ing,  not  a single Republican  has  yet  joined  in  as  co-sponsor  of
H.  Con. Res.  573 by  Clem  Miller  (D.  Cat), which  cites  the
UN  resolution  last  year  against  a  resumption  of  testing and
asks  our  government  to  extend  the  present  moratorium.   To
the  list  of  21  sponsors  we  published  in  our  issue  of  Feb.  15
there have now  been  added  four  more:  Cohelan  (Col),  JLever-
ing  (Ohio),  Teller  (N.Y.)   and  Holtzman    (N.Y.).
4.  The  Democratic  Advisory  Council,  whose  Science  Advi-
sory  Committee  has  been  so  helpful  on  the  nuclear  test  cessa-
tion  issue,  has  added  a  new  advisory  committee  (see  box  be-
low)   to plan  for  an  economy  of peace.
5.  When  the  American  Chemical  Society  meeting  in  Cleve-
* Since  the  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  if  it  were  headed
by  a  hostile  chairman,  could  block  swift  action  on  a  treaty,
Fulbright's statement  was  news  of  first  importance.  The  New
York  Times,  which  consistently   underplays  or  omits   news
which  points  hopefully  toward  a  nuclear  agreement,  ignored
the  story  in  its  own  out  of  town  editions  and  brushed  it  off
with  a  few  paragraphs  buried  in  another  story  in  its   Late
City  Edition  ApriL 7.
Ten  Democrats  Speak  Up  on CBR
"Gratified  that  American  Chemical  Society  is  publi-
cizing  problems  of  chemical  and  biological  warfare  and
defense   against  it.   Believe  that  planning  for   defense
against  chemical  and  biological  weapons  may  well  need
more  effort  and  money.    Would suggest,  however,  that
certain   problems  arise   in  present   state  of   American
policy  and  world  opinion.
"So  long  as  the  U.S.  has  not  taken  formal  position
reaffirming  national  purpose  never  to  use  these  weapons
unless  first  used  by  an  enemy,  and  so  long  as  CBR  de-
fense  and  offense  are  both  centered  in  Army Chemical
Corps,  much  of  world  will  be  uneasy  about  our  inten-
tions  if  we  increase  budget  for  CBR  defense.
"Would  suggest  therefore  that  Chemical  Society   ex-
plore  possibility  of  separating  offensive  from  defensive
research  in  chemical  and biological  war,  possibly  giving
task  of  defense  to  Public  Health  Service.   Suggest  also
that  Chemical Society  press  for  reaffirmation  of  Ameri-
can  policy  against  first  use  of  these  weapons,  as  pre-
requisite  for   world   understanding  of   our  interest   in
CBR-defense  program."
—Wire   by  10  Democratic  Congressmen  April   8  to
American  Chemical Society  meeting  in  Cleveland signed
by  Kastenmeier  (Wis),  Green  (Ore),  Heckler   (W.Va.),
Johnson   (Col),  Kowalski   (Conn),  Meyer   (Vt),   Clem
Miller  (Col),  Porter   (Ore),  Roosevelt  (Col)  and  Wier
(Minn).
land  last  week-end  was  used  by  the  Army  further  to prepare
the  public  mind  for  chemical  and  bacteriological  warfare,  ten
members of  Congress  (see box above), sent  the  Society  a wire
of  warning.    Again,  all  ten  were  Democrats.
6.  Governor   Meyner   (D.   N.J.)    in   a   series   of   recent
speeches  has  taken  the  offensive  against the  delusions fostered
by  Governor  Rockefeller's  shelter  program,  and  called  for  a
vigorous search  for  peace.  "Let's test the Russians," he  told  an
audience  in  California  Mar. 9,  "instead of  testing the bombs."
On  the  other  side  of  the  fence  in  the  Democratic  party,
Lyndon  Johnson gave  the  Baltimore  Sun  an  interview  (April
9)   taking  a  dim  view  of  a  nuclear  test  cessation  agreement.
He  and  Symington  (like Truman  and  Acheson)  represent  the
arms  race  forces.    Stevenson,  Humphrey,  Kennedy,  Fulbright,
Clark,  Proxmire  and  Meyner  are  among  the  elements  which
offer  leadership  for  peace  within  the  Democratic  party.
Democratic  Advisory  Council  Sets  Up  Group  to  Study  Economics of  Peace
"Just  as  it  is  necessary  for  a  nation  to  prepare  for  war,
so  also  must a nation prepare for peace.. . . We believe  that
peace  is  attainable.   We  are  particularly encouraged  by  the
knowledge,  which  came  to  us  through  a  study  of  our  Advi-
sory  Committee on  Science  and Technology,  that  it  is  possi-
ble   to  develop   a   system   of   detecting   nuclear   explosions
down  to  very  low yields.  .  .  .  We are  encouraged  that  the
prospects  for a treaty banning nuclear  tests  appear  brighter.
It  is  necessary  that  we prepare now for a  planned  transition
to  a  peaceful  economy.  . . .
"We  shall  attempt  to  apply  creative  thinking  toward  the
use  of  all  our  resources   in  developing  the   underdeveloped
areas  of  our own and other  lands. ...  We plan  to  organize
our  committee  along  the  lines  of  the  Livermore  and  Man-
hattan  projects.   Scientists  of  various  skills  will  work not  in
separate  cubby-holes  but  together   as  a  team  in   attacking
the  problems before  them. . . .  We are choosing  for  this job
physical  and biological  scientists,  economists,  historians  and
other   social   scientists   and  humanists.   We  will  put  them
together  to  apply  their  joint  backgrounds  and skills  to  this
project  which  may  prove  to  be  the  Number  One  problem  of
the  new  decade."
—Newly  established  Committee  on  the  Economics of  Peace
for   the  Democratic  Advisory    Council.   Co-chairmen:   Dr.
Polykarp   Kusch  (1955  Nobel  Prize  Winner  in  Physics)  of
Columbia  and  Dr.  Seymour   E.  Harris,  economist,  of   Har-
vard.  Other  members:  Dr. H.  Bentley  Glass,  biology, Johns
Hopkins;  Dr. Richard  A.  Lester,  economics, Princeton;  Dr.
Isador  Lubin, economics, Rutgera;  Dr.  F.  T.  McClure,  phy-
sics,  Johns  Hopkins;  Dr.  Arthur  Schlesinger,  Jr.,   history,
Harvard.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, April  18,1960
Emil  Mazey  Lifts  Curtain on  Labor's  Timidity in  the  Quemoy-Matsu  Crisis  of  1955
UAW's  No.  2  Top  Man  Calls  for  New  China  Policy  in  Search  for  Peace
By  Emil Mazey
Secretary-Treasurer,  United Auto  Workers
Labor  leaders  have  been  reluctant  to  speak  out  on  Foreign
Policy  issues  because  of   the   fear   of  being   labelled   soft   on
Communism.   To  emphasize  this  timidity on  the  part  of  the
labor  movement, I  wish to  point  out  that  in  February of  1955,
during  the  Matsu  and  Quemoy  Island  disputes,  I  raised  the
subject   matter   at   a   closed   meeting  of   the   CIO   Executive
Board,  and  expressed  my  deep  concern  for  policies  that  could
lead  to  World  War  III.   I  did  not  ask the  CIO  to  take a  posi-
tion,  but  urged  them  to  re-evaluate  our  attitude  towards  the
entire  China  crisis.   I  was  shocked  when  a  motion  was  made
to  expunge  my  remarks  from  the  record  and  was  even  more
shocked  when  a  majority  of  the  Board  supported  this  action.
I  am  sure  that  what  I  have  to  say today  will  be  unpopular
with  some  labor  leaders  and  among  some  of  the  politicians  in
this  country,  but  I  am  going  to  express  my  views  whether
anybody  likes  what  I  have  to  say or  not.
Too  Much  Brass  on  the  Gravy  Train
I  find  it  difficult  to  know  what  the  truth  is  concerning  our
defenses  against  possible  nuclear  warfare  because  of  the  con-
flicting  views  and  opinions  of  men  in  public  life  and  of  our
military  leaders.   It  becomes  even  more  difficult  for  a  layman
to  evaluate  the  seriousness  of  our  defense  posture  because  so
many  former  generals  and  admirals  now  occupy  key  positions
at  scandalous  salaries  for  companies  engaged  in  defense  pro-
duction  that  it  is  hard  to  know  whether  our  military  leaders
are  expressing  honest,  patriotic  views  or  are  merely  making  a
pitch  for  a  post-service  job.
An  additional  difficulty  is the  vested  interest  that  many  cor-
porations  have  in  the  continuation   of   the  cold  war.   Over
90%  of  all  the  aircraft  production  in  our  country  is  for  mili-
tary  purposes  and  the  only  customer  is  Uncle  Sam.   The  end
of  the  cold  war  could  be  the  end  of  their   business.
Workers  engaged  in  military  production  also  have  a  vested
right   [sic]   in  the  continuation  of  the  cold  war  because  our
government  has  no  plans  on  how  to  use  the  defense  plants
for  peacetime production  and  how  to  adequately  guarantee  full
employment  to  workers  engaged  in  military  production.
During  World  War   II,  any  worker  who  was  warm,  was
able  to  get  a  job,  despite  his  age,  sex  or  color  of  his  skin.
Many  of  them'were  heard  to  remark,  'I  hope  the  war  lasts
forever.'   This  comment  is  understandable,  especially  after  the
worker  has  been  plagued  with  unemployment,  insecurity  and
want,  many  of  them  from  the  dark  days  of   1930  depression.
In  preparing  my  remarks  for  this  meeting  tonight,  I  have
As  contrasting  backdrop  to  the  pre-summit  foreign
policy  meeting to  be  held  in  New  York  April  18-19  by
the  AFL-CIO  under  Meany-Lovestone  control,  we  pre-
sent  here  an  abridged version  of  a  speech  on  "Labor's
Stake  in  Peace"  made  in  Chicago  Feb.  20  at  a  meeting
under   the   auspices  of   the   American   Friends  Service
Committee  (300  W.  Congress  Parkway,  Chicago  7,  111.)
by  Emil  Mazey,  secretary-treasurer  of  the  United Auto
Workers.   So  little  publicity  has  been  given  this  out-
spoken  speech  in  the  U.S.  that  our  first  knowledge of
it  came  from  an  article  in  The  Tribune  of   London  by
Fenner  Brockway.    Reprints  of  the  Mazey  speech  may
be  obtained from  the  AFSC in  Chicago.
•done more  reading  and  more  studying  of  the  defense  needs of
our  nation  than  in  any other  period  of  my life.   After  reading
and  studying  these  numerous  proposals,  I  am  more  alarmed
than  ever  that  World  War  III  might  start  as  a  result  of  an
accident,  a  crash  of  a  plane  loaded  with  atomic  weapons,  or
by  some  trigger-happy  Colonel.   I  have  reached  the  conclusion
that  there  is  no  alternative  to  peace.
I  believe  that  we  must  work  towards  universal  disarmament
and  be  more  flexible  in  our  discussions  with  the  Russians  on
this  subject.   Our  government  must  also  establish  a  National
Planning  Board  for  the  peaceful  use  of  our  military  plants.
This  proposal  is  now  new.   Walter  Reuther,  president  of  the
UAW,  proposed  after  World  War  II  the  use  of  our  aircraft
plants  to  produce  housing  on  a  mass  production  basis.
What A Mere One Percent  Could Do
If  only  one  percent  of  the  $175,000,000,000  that  is  annu-
ally  spent  for  military purposes  [by  all  nations]  was  used  to
wipe  out  hunger  and  raise  living  standards,  we  would  have
$1,750,000,000  available  for  these  purposes.
I  believe  that  no  meaningful  discussion  towards  universal
disarmament  can  be  achieved  with  our  present  policy  towards
Red  China.   I  urge  a  complete  re-evaluation  of  our   Foreign
Policy  towards  China  on  a  realistic  and  objective  basis.   I  be-
lieve  that  tensions  with  China  and  with  other  sections  of  the
world  are  unnecessarily prolonged   by  the  belief   that   Chiang
Kai-shek  and  his  discredited,  corrupt,  military  dictatorship  is
the  true  spokesman  for  China  and  that  it  is  the  policy  of  the
United  States  to  return  Chiang  Kai-shek  to  the  mainland.
I  call  upon  all  of  our  citizens  to  take  great  interest  in  our
Foreign  Policy—to  stimulate  objective  discussion  without  fear
of  the  slurs  and  the  slanders  of  those  within  our  government
who  use  the  fear  of  Soviet  Russia  and  Communism  as  a  con-
venient  way  to  stifle  democratic discussion.
Only  Adenauer  Speaks in  the  Wildly  Intransigeant  Tone  of  the  AFL-CIO
"Khrushchov  has  been  more  truculent  and  demanding in
his   aggression  than   Stalin.   The  present   Kremlin  course
towards  the  problem  of  German  reunification  and  Berlin  is
far  tougher  than  the  harshest  Soviet  proposals put forward
under Stalin....
"The  latest  Khrushchov  proposal  for  so-called  disarma-
ment,  within four  years,  continues  Moscow's  stubborn  oppo-
sition  to  genuine  international inspection  and control.  .  .  .
The  'stages' proposed by Khrushchov are  aimed at  unilateral
and  total  disarmament  of  our  country  and  its  democratic
allies.    His  insistence  on  turning  West  Berlin  into  a  so-
called  free  city;  on  maintaining  Soviet  veto  power  in  the
Security  Council;  on  NATO  acceptance of  the'Soviet  'disen-
gagement' project  and 'atom  free'  zones;  and on dismantling
and eliminating America's overseas defense  bases  are among
Moscow's  gradual  steps  for  the  total  disarmament  of   the
free world...."
—Policy  Resolutions, AFL-CIO  Convention, Sept. 1959.
6  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  18,1960
Nixon  Names  A  Time-Life   Admirer  of  Dr.  Teller  as  His  Campaign   Adviser  on  Policy
Ike  Unveils  the  "What's  The  Use of Revolting?" Theory  to  Chile's  Students
The  misery  of  the  downtrodden  often  finds  memorable  ex-
pression  but  the  reply  of  the  rich  and  well-fed  rarely  makes
literature.   The  letter  the  Chilean  students*  handed  the  Presi-
dent  when  he  visited  Santiago  was  eloquent;  the  reply  given
them  on  Mr.  Eisenhower's  behalf  by our  Ambassador  to  Chile
is  turgid,  evasive  and  boring.   But  at  one  point  in  its  6,000
poorly  chosen  words  the  truth  breaks  through.   This  is  in  its
answer  to the  complaint  that we have  looked  much  too  benevo-
lently  on  Latin  America's   dictators.
After  a  little  preliminary  tub-thumping  on  how  democratic
we  are,  the  reply  says  "We   shall  continue  to  favor  any  ap-
proach   to  the   reduction  and   elimination   of    anti-democratic
governmental  practices  which  has  a  real  prospect  of   success."
But,  it  hastens  to  add,  "It  would  be  nothing  less  than  fool-
hardy  to  become  so  obsessed  with  the  destruction  of  undemo-
cratic  regimes   as  to  embark  upon   actions  leading  to   chaos,
anarchy  or  their  replacement  by a  new  but  even  more  danger-
ous form  of  tyranny."
What's  the  Use  of   Revolting?
When  the  cellophane  is  unwrapped  from  these  phrases,  we
find   an   accurate   description   of   our   attitude   toward   Latin
American  rightist  dictatorships.  We  are  not  opposed,   indeed
we might  even  be said  to  favor,  "any  approach"  to  a lessening
of  "anti-democratic governmental practices"  which  "has  a  real
prospect  of  success."    This  means  in  practice  that  if  there  is
some  way to persuade a Trujillo,  a  Somoza or  a  Batista  to  ease
up  a  bit,  we  are  all  for  it.   But  we  are  not  "so  obsessed"  with
dislike  for  these  dictatorships  as  to  venture  action  that  might
only  bring  "chaos"  and  "anarchy"   (Castro?)   or  "a  new  but
even  more  dangerous  form  of  tyranny",  i.e.   Communism.
So  long  as  a  dictator  plays  ball  with   American   property
rights,  we  are  loath  to  disturb  him.   It  is  when,  as  in  Guate-
mala  and  Cuba,  regimes  appear  which  threaten  U.S.   interests
and  move  in  a  socialist  direction,  that  we unleash  our  thurider-
* Although   the  reply  made  page  one  headlines,  the  original
letter  was  given  scant  attention  in  our press.  Indeed  the  only
place  an  abridged  text  was  made  available  was  in  our  issues
of   March   21  and  28.—IPS.
bolts.   If  Castro  had  made  a  deal  with  the  United  Fruit  Com-
pany you would  never  have  seen  that  3 column  page  one  head-
line  in the  New  York  Times  of  April  9,  over  its  story on  Ike's
reply  to  the  Chilean  students,  "President   Says  Castro  Has  Be-
trayed  the  Ideals  of  the  Revolution."
Nixon's  Revealing  Choice
Some  indication  of  Nixon's  carefully  hidden  current  politi-
cal  outlook  may be  inferred  from  his  choice  of  James  Shepley,
head  of  the  Time-Life   Washington  bureau,  to  become his  aide
on  "policy  and  issues"  during  the  campaign.   Mr.  Shepley  will
take  a  leave of  absence  from  the  Luce  organization.   His  book,
"The  Hydrogen  Bomb",  (1954)  was a glorification  of  Edward
Teller  and  an  attack  on  Robert  Oppenheimer.   Sample  passage
—a  gem  of  unconscious  self-parody:  "Like  most  top  theoreti-
cal  physicists,  cosmology  was  Teller's  dish  of  tea.   But  curi-
ously,  Teller,  the  idea  man,  objected  most  strenuously  to  a
purely  conceptual   approach   even  in  broad-brush   cosmology."
Gee.
The  strangest  bit  of  political   gossip  floating  around   "the
Hill",  in  the  wake  of  the  Wisconsin  primary  is  that  arrange-
ments  have  been  concluded   for  a  Johnson-Humphrey  ticket.
This  combination  of  the  most  conservative  with  the  most  lib-
eral  Democratic  candidate  would   be  ideal   for   Johnson   but
damaging  to  Humphrey.   My  own  opinion,  for  what  it  may be
worth,  is  that  there  will  have  to  be  a  Catholic  in  the  No.  2
spot  on  the  Democratic  ticket  this  year.   The  best  that  can  be
hoped  for  is  a  Stevenson-Kennedy  ticket;  the  worst  a  Syming-
ton-Wagner   combination.   The  latter  would  be  a  natural  for
the  Truman-Acheson  forces;  the  former  would  give  the  coun-
try  a  ticket  firmly  committed  on  the  nuclear  testing  issue.
Remembering  the  unanimity   of   our   press  in   denouncing
political  interference  with  literature  in  the  case  of  Pasternak's
Dr.  Zhivago,  we're  waiting  to  see  how  many  editorial  pages
will  protest  Frank  Sinatra's  dropping  of  Albert  Maltz—one  of
the  Hollywood  Ten—as  script  writer  for  "The   Execution  of
Private  Slovik." ...  In  the  death  of  Lowell  Mellett,  we salute
with  respect  and  affection  the  passing  of  a  grand  old-timer of
American  liberal  journalism at  its  best.
The   1959   Index   Is  Ready   and  You  Can  Get  A  Free  Copy   If  You  Send  A  Stamped   Self-Addressed    Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City    .
.......................Zone............State....................
4/18/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City        ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone'i   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Aurust  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  IS,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
SB  in  the   U.  S.:  $6  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.   "Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED