I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960dec12.pdf

============================================================

Symington's  Arms  Report  to Kennedy,  P.  3
Warning  Against  Totalitarian  Style  Plans  in  Congress  for  A  "West  Point  of  the   Cold  War",  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  46
DECEMBER  12,  1960
'<>'       WASHINGTON, D.   C.
15  CENTS
The  Jungle  Spreads   Far  Beyond  the  Congo
In  the  debate on  the  Congo  before  the  UN  General Assem-
bly,   Mr.   Aw,  the  delegate  of  Mali,  expressed  views  which
speak  for  all  the  small  powers  caught  in  the  feud  between
U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.    "For  a  long  time,"  he  told  the  Assembly
Nov.  21,  "the  destiny  of  the  Congolese  people  is  not  even
bothered  about  by  certain  delegations  that  speak  a  lot  about
the  Congolese  problem.    The  American  press  and  the  press
of  many  other  Western  countries,"  he  continued,  "reduce  the
whole  drama  to  a  Lumumba-Kasavubu  match,  and  they  say
this  is  the  same  thing  as  a  Russian-American  match.    If  Mr.
Lumumba  prevails,  they  say the  Soviet  team  would  have  pre-
vailed  over  the  American  team.  .  .  .  These  are  the  terms in
which  the  Congolese  problem  is  being  described  to  us,  and
this  is  the  crux  of  the  tragedy.    Once  the  problem  is  put  in
this  form  all  means are good,  all  blows  are  fair."
Lumumba's  Fate  Recalls  Nagy's
Each  of  the  two  great  protagonists  regards  the  other  as  the
embodiment  of  all  evil;  the  word  Communism  has  a  Satanic
ring  on  one  side,  the  word  Capitalism  on  the  other.    If  it
becomes  a  question  of  which  is  to  win,  so  apocalyptic an  end
justifies   the   means  on   either   side.     So  when  the  Russians
invaded  Hungary  24  hours  after  a  declaration  of  non-inter-
vention,  their  partisans  justified  illegality  and  force  on  "real-
istic"  grounds  of  preventing  Capitalism  from   establishing  a
base  in  Eastern  Europe.    The  same  mentality, though  on  the
other  side  politically,  can  now  be  heard  justifying  illegality
and  force  in  the  Congo  on  the  grounds  of  preventing  Commu-
nism  from  establishing  a  base  in  the  heart  of  Africa.    Lu-
mumba,  like  Nagy,  incurred   suspicion  by  declaring  for  neu-
tralism.    This  made  him  "pro-Communist"   in  the  U.S.  press
as  it  made  Nagy  "pro-capitalist"   in  the  Soviet  press.    After
that  his  kidnapping  and  murder  by  the  Russians  seemed  a
minor  incident,  as  Lumumba's  will  seem  to  our  press  should
Mobutu  execute  him  now.    Indeed  editorial  writers  even  on
our  more  civilized  papers   (see  box  in  next  column)   have
already  reacted  to  his  arrest and  mistreatment with  a barbarity
not   so  unlike  those   of   Lumumba's  own  native   opponents.
There  is  a  jungle-like ferocity  about  the  way the  great  Powers
directly  or  through  their  partisans  hunt  down  those  who  dare
oppose  their  will.
Hardly  ten  weeks  have  passed  since  President   Eisenhower
in  his address to the  United  Nations  pledged   non-intervention
in  the  internal  affairs  of  the  new  African  States  and  warned
that  if  the  United  Nations  failed  in  Africa   "the   world  will
be on its way back to  ...    power  politics,  in which  small  coun-
tries  will  be  used  as  pawns   By  aggressive   major   powers."
Yet  even  as  he  spoke  our  Embassy in  Leopoldville  had  begun
the  process  of  finding  us  a  Congolese  Batista  in  Mobutu  and
Snips  from  A  Civilized  Press
"But   one  thing  is  clear  enough.    The  struggle   be.
tween  the  elements  headed  by  Mr.  Kasavubu  and  those
who   support   Lumumba  is  not  a  political   contest   as
we  in  this  country  understand  such  things.    It   is  a
grim  relentless,  unprincipled  battle  for  survival.   There
will  be  no  winner  and  loser  in  the  conventional  sense.
Instead,  one  will  win  and  the  other  will  be  destroyed.
In   this   situation,   the   United   Nations  cannot   escape
reality  by  invoking  lofty  phrases. ...  we  think  the
West   should   welcome  the   jailing   of   Mr.  Lumumba.
Surely  that   is  where  he  belongs."
—Washington  Star  editorial, Dec. 6
suspending  parliamentary government.    As  in  Latin  America,
we reached instinctively for  a military dictator,  and  fear  parlia-
mentary  rule  lest  it  prove  "unreliable."    And  the  bulk  of  our
press  applauded  on  the  premise  that  anything  is  justified  so
long  as  it  is  supposedly  a  question  of  saving  the  Congo  from
Communism.
Most  Americans are  unwilling  to  recognize  what  happened
in  the  Congo.    Let us  again  turn  to  the  speech  of  the  delegate
from  Mali.    "The  United  Nations  Force—let  us  never  forget
that,"  he  told  the  General   Assembly,  "was   called  in  by  a
Government  which  was safely  installed.  .  .  .  The  UN  Force
has  assisted  in  the  illegal  dismissal  of  that  government—and
then  it  comes around  looking  for  the  locus  of  legal  authority."
So  long  as  the   United   Nations   by  "non-intervention"    and
"neutrality"   allowed   the  Belgians  to  take  over  first  in  the
secessionist  Katanga  and  more  recently  at  the  center  in  Leo-
poldville,   the   U.S.  was  a  strong   supporter   of   the   United
Nations.     But  when   Dayal   reported   from   the   Congo   that
the  Belgians  were  not  only  arming  and  financing  the  Mo-
butu  regime  but  egging  it  on  against  the  UN  command,  and
Hammarskjold  demanded  that  Brussels  withdraw  its  military
and  civilian  advisers  we  supported   the  Belgians  against  the
UN,  engaging  in  exactly  the  policy Mr.  Eisenhower so recently
condemned,   and  precipitating   the  East-West   battle   now  re-
newed  in  the  Security   Council.
The  UN  command  is  breaking  up:  Egypt,  Ghana,  Ceylon,
Yugoslavia    and   Indonesia   are   withdrawing   their    troops.
In  Belgium,   Tshombe  of  Katanga   has  been  given   a  medal
(see  page  four)  while  in  the  Congo  Lumumba  will  be  lucky
if  unlike  Nagy  he  escapes  liquidation.    Belgian  big  business
and  its  Rockefeller  partners  in  Katanga  are  winning  but  the
price  is  the  loss  of  emergent  Africa's  faith  in  the  UN,   and
the  flaring  up  of  the  cold  war  in  a  new  area  when  the  world
needs   relaxed   tension   for   wider   negotiations.     The   jungle
is  spreading  out  from  the  Congo.            Washington,  Dec.  7
1   7  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December 12, 1960
The   Story   of   A  Totalitarian-Style   Measure   Francis  Walter  Blocked  Last   Summer
Time to Awaken Public to Dangers  in  Bill for  "West Point  of the Cold  War"
By  Benjamin  Ginzburg *
On  August  30,  I960,  in  the  dosing  rush  of  the  bob-tailed
session  of  Congress,  the  United  States  Senate  approved,  with-
out  a  record  vote  though  with  some  voiced  opposition,   a  bill
which  would  commit  our  government  to  fighting  Communism
by  the  totalitarian  methods  of  government  indoctrination  of
the  people  at  home  and  propaganda   and  subversion  abroad.
The  bill  called  for  the  setting  up  of  a  Freedom   Commission
as a propaganda  agency  and  a Freedom  Academy which  would
train  at government  expense  leaders  to  indoctrinate  our  people
and  to  carry  on  political  warfare with  no  holds  barred  abroad.
Passage  of  the  bill  in  the  House  was  blocked   by  none  other
than  Francis  Walter,  Chairman  of  the  House  Un-American
Activities  Committee,   who  no  doubt   detected   in  the  bill  a
possible  challenge  to the  power  and  authority of  his  committee.
Undoubtedly  the  group  behind  the  bill  will   try  again  at
the  next  Congress.    Should   they  succeed  in  patching  up  the
internal   quarrel   among   witch-hunters—which   is  quite  pos-
sible—the  bill  may  go  through   Congress   like  a  breeze.   That
is  to  say,  unless  the   American  people  are  awakened  to  its
implications  before  it  is  too  late.
Weak-Minded  Liberals   Joined  In
The  story  behind  the  bill  for  the  Freedom  Academy—the
"West  Point  of  political   warfare"   as  Life    called   it—is   the
story  of  a  group  of  young  busy-bodies  in  Orlando,   Florida,
who  after  talking  glibly  of  the  science  of  counteracting  Com-
munism  in  community  and  PTA  meetings  took  their  idea  to
New  York  and  won  the  support  of  a  fantastic  array  of  lib-
erals,  right-wing  Socialists,  McCarthyites,  Lovestoneites,  Hen-
ry-Lucites,  and  even  supposed  civil  libertarians.
When  the  bill  fathered  by  this  group  was  first  introduced
by   Congressman  Herlong  of   Florida   (in   February,    1959)
with  an  editorial  send-off   from  Life,   I  interviewed  the  Con-
gressman.    I  could  not  believe  my  ears  when  he  told  me  that
the  bill  had  the  support  of  a  spectrum  ranging  all  the  way
from   the  New   Leader  crowd  to  Buckley's  National   Review
and  including, in  between,  AFL-CIO  people  and  Irving  Fer-
man  of  the  American Civil  Liberties  Union.    He  also  told  me
that  liberals  like  Senator  Douglas  would  sponsor  the  bill  in
the  Senate.   I  found  his  statements  were  only  too  true.
I  tried  to  stir  up  opposition  to  the  bill  among non-hysterical
groups,  but  everybody thought  that  the  bill  would  never  get
to  first  base—so  why  worry  about  it.    Actually  the  plan  to
hold  hearings  on  it  by the  Un-American  Activities  Committee
* Former  Research  Director,  Senate   Subcommittee  on  Con-
stitutional  Rights,  author  of  "Rededication  to   Freedom."
struck  a  snag,  and  then  the  bill  was  introduced  in  the  Senate
"In  defending  itself ...  a  democratic   country,   par-
ticularly  when  it  is   faced   with  the  sort  of  challenge
we  are,  would  be  foolishly  naive  if  it  tried  to  confine
itself  entirely  to  open  methods.    The  CIA  operates  in
the  covert  area.    As  far  as  the  Freedom   Academy   is
concerned,  it  would  not be  operating   in  that  field.  .  .  .
But  students  should  understand  the  covert  part  of  the
problem."
—Testimony  for  S  1689, June  1959.
"Pink"  as  Well  as  "Red"  Must  Be   Excised
Mr.   [J.   G.]   SOURWINE   [counsel    for   the    Senate
Internal   Security   committee]:   Mr.   Judd,   you   spoke
of   the   parallel  between  an  operation  for   cancer   and
the  attack  on  the  Communist conspiracy. ...  I  would
like  to  take  this  opportunity to  ask  you:  when  a   sur-
geon  operates  for  cancer,  is  he  content  to  remove  the
cancer  or  does  he  consider  it  important  to  remove  the
surrounding  pink  tissue?
Rep.   [Walter  H.]  JUDD   (co-sponsor   of  S  1689  the
Freedom    Commission   and   Freedom    Academy   bill):
"Yes,   he  has   to  take   some   normal  tissue  also  if   he
wants  to  be  sure  of  getting   all  the  disease  process.
—Hearings   on  S  1689  June  19,  1959.
by  Senators Mundt  and  Douglas  and  referred  by clever  parlia-
mentary  manoeuvering  to  the  Judiciary  Committee   (instead
of  to  the  Foreign  Relations  Committee)   so  that  it  could  be
handled  by  Judiciary's   Internal   Security  Subcommittee.     The
latter  quietly  arranged  a  set  of  hearings  without  publicity  and
invited  only  friends  of  the  bill  to  testify.   The  hearings  were
held  in  June  1959,  but  a  report  was  not  filed  until  June  30,
I960—that  is  to  say until  what  was  thought  to  be  the  closing
days  of  the  86th  Congress.    When  the  Congress  was  recessed
until  after  the  conventions,  the  bill  was  put  on  the  calendar
and  brought  on  the  floor  in  the  closing   days  of  the   special
session.    Senators  Young  and  Fulbright  asked  why  the   bill
had  not  been  referred   to  the  Foreign   Relations  Committee.
Senator  Dodd   replied:
"Of  what  great  moment  is  it  that  the  bill  was  sent  to  the
Judiciary  Committee instead  of  to the  Committee  on  Labor  and
Public Welfare,  or  the  Committee on  Government   Operations,
or  the  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations?"
And  that  was  the  end  of  the  objections;  the  bill  passed.
But  for  Francis  Walter  it  would  as  easily  have  passed   the
House  and  we  might  have  found  ourselves  committed  to  a
government  program  of   subversive  activities  abroad   as  well
as  to  Big  Brother  indoctrination   at  home.
It  does  not  require much  imagination  to  see how  stupid  and
suicidal  to  peace a  program  of  political  warfare  abroad  would
turn  out  to  be.    At  home,  we  need  only  read  the  statement
of  Mrs.  E.  Wyatt  Payne,  of  Huntington,   W.Va.   (Hearings,
pp.   156-9)   to  understand  what  types  of  opinion  would   be
proscribed.     Mrs.   Payne  goes   back  to   the   Willard   Givens
National   Education  Association  report   of   1934,   which  en-
dorsed  the  New   Deal  social  philosophy,  and   says  that  that
is  the  Communist-Socialist doctrine  we  have  to  attack.   "Bil-
lions  put  into  buildings  and  salaries,"  she  writes,  "will  not
reverse   the   Communist-Socialist  trend   in   education   unless
and  until  the  curriculum  is  changed.  .  .  .  Yes,  we  need  the
Freedom  Academy,  and  we  need  it   now."
Since  the  counsel  and  high  priest  of  the  Internal  Security
Subcommittee  has  laid  down  the  dogma  that  in  eliminating
the  cancer  of  Communism  we  must  also  cut  out   "the   sur-
rounding  pink  tissue,"   (see   box  above)   we  can  be   pretty
sure  that  the  graduates  and  trainees  of  the  so-called  Freedom
Academy,  when  they  should  go  back  to  their  home  commu-
nities  to  fight  Communism,  will  be  no  more  niggardly  than
Mrs.  Payne  in  their  definitions  of  Red  and  Pink.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  December  IS,  1960
Time   for   Reflection   More   Important   Than   Quicker-on-the-Trigger   Military   Mechanisms
Symington  Defense  Report  to  Kennedy  Repeats  Rockefeller  Proposals
The  report  to  Kennedy  by  Senator  Symington  on  reorgani-
zation  of  the  armed  forces  is  a  rehash   of  familiar  elements
long  advocated  by  the  Air  Force  and  earlier  embodied  in  the
Rockefeller  Bros,  report  in  January,  1958.     The  new   report,
like the earlier  one,  calls  for  reorganization  of  the  armed  forces
to  create  three  separate  unified  commands,  one  strategic   (for
massive  attack  or  retaliation),  the  second  tactical  (for   swift
action  in  so-called  brush-fire,, i.e.  colonial,   conflicts)  and   the
third  for  continental  defense.
Symington  said  this  reorganization  would   save  20  percent
or  $8  billion  a  year  on  the  military  budget,   an  estimate  not
contained  in  the  report  itself.    This  is  fantasy.    At  least  the
Rockefeller  report  did  not  pretend   to  save  money  but  called
for   successive  annual  increases  of  $3  billion  a  year  "for   the
next  several  years."
Sure  Cure  for  A   Headache
The  new  report   also  repeats  the  Rockefeller   recommenda-
tion  that  the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff   be  made
"the   principal   military   adviser   to   the   President."     In   the
1954   Indochinese  crisis,   the   then   Chairman,   Admiral  Rad-
ford,  a  naval  aviator,  stood  with  Dulles  and  Nixon  for  inter-
vention.    The  Army  Chief   of  Staff,  Gen.  Ridgway,  won  out
in  his  opposition   because  he  not  only  had  direct  access  to  the
President  but  was  able  to  send  a  mission  to  Indochina  which
reported  back  unfavorably.    Intervention  was  based  on  glam-
orous  air  force  delusions.    That  jungle  war  could   not  have
been  ended  from  the  air  but  would   soon  have  bogged   down
into  a  long  and  bloody  mess  on  the  ground.
The  Symington  report  stresses   "the  unprecedented  strategic
value  of  time."    The  Indochinese  affair  shows  the  importance
of  time  for  reflection  as  a  safeguard  against  the  kind  of  mili-
tary  thinking  which   believes   any  problem   can  be  solved   if
sufficient   force   is  applied   to   it.    This   is  true  only   in   the
sense  that  a  headache  may  be  cured  by  a  bullet  through   the
brain.
The  stress  on  time  also  appears  in  the  committee's   proposal
to  step  up  the  arms  race  by ending the  practice  of   "separating
the  development  and  production  cycle  into  two parts."    Essen-
tially  this  means  that  you  rush  into  production   before  you
really  have  finished  development.    The  report   says  we  waste
money  by  "building  weapons  which  become  obsolescent   as  a
result  of  delay."    But  often,  by  not  rushing  into   production,
money   is  saved  because  the   new  weapon   has   already   been
rendered  obsolete  by  a  new  development.    To  speed  up  de-
velopment  is  to  speed  up  obsolescence.    There  is  no  way  out
of   this  rat  race  except  by  disarmament.    But  all  this   report
calls  for  along  that  line  is  "a  special  assistant  to  the  Secretary
of  Defense  for  arms  control."     "Arms  control"  is to  disarma-
ment  what  Sanka  is  to  coffee.     It  is  the  Pentagon's   favorite
substitute.     Arms  race  and   arms  control   talks  could   go  on
happily  side  by  side.
A  Carefully   Packed  Jury
Kennedy  must  have  known  what  he  would   get  when   he
named   this  committee.    At   least  six  of   its  seven  members
have  been  publicly  associated  with  the  aviation  lobby  view-
point:  Roswell  L.  Gilpatric,  a  former  Under  Secretary  of  the
Air  Force,  was  also  on  the  panel  which  wrote  the  Rockefeller
report;  Thomas  K.  Finletter,  once  Truman's  Secretary  of  the
Air   Force,  helped  write  the  Air  Policy  report  for  a  stepped
up   arms  race   in   1948;   Symington   himself   another  former
Air  Force  Secretary,  has  been  the  aviation  lobby's main mouth-
piece  in  the  Senate;  Fowler  Hamilton  was  Symington's coun-
sel  in  running  the  airpower   investigation   several  years  ago
which  popularized  Air  Force views;  and  Marx  Leva was  coun-
sel  to  Secretary of  Defense  Forrestal.    The  seventh   member,
Clark    Clifford,    was   Truman's   counsel.     This    committee,
stacked  for   the  Air   Force,  was  hardly  an  objective  body  to
study  reorganizaticn  of   the  armed  services.
The  London  Times  Offers  the  Kennedy  Administration   Some  Foreign  Policy  Advice
"Negotiations  are  possible  only  where  the  two  sides,  as
systems  of  states,  have  a.  common  interest  in  seeking  agree-
ment.  .  .  .  The  first  and  most  obvious  field  where  the  two
sides  should  have   a.  common  interest  is  in  ending  the  arms
race.. . .
"At  present,  the  momentum  of  military   invention  seems
to  have  its  own  terrible  force,  giving  impetus  to  the  mount-
ing   suspicion   which,   in   turn,   give   force   to   the   military
competition.    Whether  the  United  Nations  will  be  able  to
get  the  disarmament  talks  going  again  is  highly  doubtful.
The  truth  is  that  there  is  no earthly  use  in  comparing  rival
plans  until  there  is  the  political  will  to  agree. ...  A   sum-
mit  meeting  might  clear  the  air  enough  for  a  fresh  begin-
ning  to  be  made.
"In  the   meantime,   Britain  and  the   United  States  have
every  reason  to  press  on  with  the  talks  on  the  suspension
of  nuclear  tests.    History  has  recorded  what  happened  last
time  when  the  loose  ends  were  left,  supposedly  to  be  tied
up  at  the  summit  which  did  not  take  place.    Failure  now
would  put  paid  [sic]  to  the  last  flicker  of  hope  for  general
disarmament   .  .  .  restart   the  whole   suicidal   business  of
pollution   from   atomic  bomb  tests  .  .  .  destroy   the  only
likely  basis  for  associating  other  countries,  France  first  and
foremost,  in  a  standstill  agreement.
'There   are   other   measures  which   the  West   could  take
without  weakening  their   miltary  strength. ...  It  must  be
hoped   that   Senator   Kennedy   will   keep   to  his   basic  view
that   the   small   Chinese   offshore   islands   now   occupied   by
Formosa  are  more  bother  and  danger  than  they  are  worth.
A   useful   step  might   be  taken  if   the  United  States   found
that   its   arms   developments    had   outstripped    the   need   to
keep   so   many   bases   that   were   designed   for   weapons  of
shorter  range.    Withdrawals   from   some  of   the  small  and
most  politically  sensitive  bases  would  be  direct  gain  to  the
alliance.
"Nearer   home   the  developing  range  of   weapons  should
logically   mean   that  the   idea  floated  by  Mr.  Macmillan  in
Moscow   could  be  taken  up  again.    The  plan  for  putting  a
ceiling  on  the  level  of  arms  on  both  sides  of  the  border  in
Central  Europe,   subject   to  inspection,  still  has  its  political
advantages.  .  .  .  One  objection  to  General  Norstad's  latest
proposals   for   putting   longer  range   nuclear  weapons  into
Europe  is  that  they  may  submerge  this  idea  and  thus  lose
an  opportunity   to  ease  tensions  in  safety.    Increased   ten-
sions  are  bound   to  bring  tighter   Russian  controls  in   the
area   where   communism   sits  most  uneasily.  .  .  .
"The   anomaly   of  Communist   China's  exclusion  from   the
UN  should  be  removed."
—The   Times   (London),   Nov.  30,  from   the  second  of  two  unusual  "leaders"  freshly   surveying  East-West  relations.
__
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December IS, 1960
More  Signs  Point  to  Surrender  on  Rules  Fight  and  A  Watered  Down  Democratic  Program
News Unfit  to Print  in  the USA:  Tshombe Gets Belgian  Welcome and Medal
We  want  to  call  attention  to  two  dispatches  from  Brussels
on  the  Reuters ticker which we  saw nowhere in  the  U.S. press.
The  first,  dated  Dec. 5,  said  Premier  Moise  Tshombe  of  Ka-
tanga  had  arrived  in  Brussels  "to  the  kind  of  welcome nor-
mally   accorded    top-flight   foreign   dignitaries."     His   party
included  not  only  his  Foreign  Minister  but  "a  Belgian  Army
major  and  an  African  lieutenant."     Tshombe  was  to  present
a  wedding present  to King  Badouin.    "On  his  departure  from
Elisabethville,"  Reuters  said,   "Tshombe   was   seen   off   by  a
crowd  of  hundreds  of  persons,  mostly  Belgians."
A  Reuters  dispatch  next  day  said  Belgium's  second  highest
decoration,  the  Grand   Cordon  of  the  Order   of  the  Crown,
had  been  conferred  on  Tshombe   for   "heroism"  by   African
Affairs  Minister  Harold  d'Aspreinont  Lynden.    Tshombe,  the
dispatch  said,  met  the  King  that  day  and  presented  his  gift,
"a  chunk  of  half-sculptured  malachite,  described  by  an  official
as  a  symbol  of  the  mineral  wealth  of   Katanga."
Humphrey  Sees  No  Need  to  Rush
Senator  Humphrey  upset  proponents   of  the  rules  changes
by  giving  an  interview  to  the  Associated  Press    (Washington
Star  Dec.  1)  in which  he  said,  "I  always have  been  in  support
of  a  more  effective  rule  to  end   filibusters.   I  see  no  reason  to
change  my position.   But  I  see no  reason  to  rush  this  thing  at
the  outset  of  the  new  Congress."     Humphrey  said  any  real
effort  to  amend  Senate  Rule  22,  which  requires  a  vote  of  two-
thirds  present   to  end  debate,  should  be  held   off  for  weeks
or   even   months.    The   interview  was  given   on  the   eve  of
Humphrey's  visit  to  Kennedy;  Humphrey  is  being  mentioned
for   the  post  of   assistant   Senate  Democratic   leader.     Three
days  later  Mansfield,  who  is  expected   to  be  majority  leader,
told  the  Washington   Star  (Dec. 4)   he  thinks  there  will  be
"a  high  degree  of  unity  and  harmony  in  the  new  Congress."
The  harmony  will  be  obtained   (according  to  a  confidential
report  by Sidney Zagri,  Capitol  Hill  lobbyist  of  the  Teamsters,
which  leaked  to  the  Washington  Daily  News  Dec. 6)   by  a
deal with  the  Southern  conservatives.   Minimum  wage,  school
construction  and  medical  care  bills  will  be  passed  but  "with
Defeat  for  the  Un-Americans
The   Un-American  Activities   Committee   suffered   a
defeat  last  week  when  the  Supreme  Court  refused   to
hear  appeals  by  the  Philadelphia  Board  of   Education
from   decisions   by   the   Pennsylvania    Supreme   Court
ordering  the  reinstatement   of  four  teachers  who  were
victims  of  the  Committee's  1954 hearings  in   Philadel-
phia.
Three  teachers,  Angelina  Intille,  Thomas  Deacon  and
Sadie  T.  Atkinson,  pleaded  the  Fifth;   Goldie  Watson,
the  First   Amendment,  when  asked  about Communist
associations.     They   were   discharged   for    "incompe-
tency."   The  State  Supreme Court  held  that  invocation
of   constitutional  privileges  did  not   constitute   incom-
pentency.
In  the  Watson  case,  the  State  court  ruled  "that  she
could   not  be  faulted   for   a  mistaken  belief   (if   such
it  was)  as  to  what her constitutional  rights  were  under
the   First   amendment.    Her   appearance   before   the
Committee  antedated  by  more  than  five  years  the  de-
cision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Barenblatt  where  it  was
held  (five  to  four)  .  .  .  that  the  First  amendment did
not  justify  Barenblatt's  refusal  to  answer  questions  of
the  same  Congressional committee concerning Commu-
nism.  .  .  .  Where  four  of  the  nine  well  trained  legal
minds  of  the  Supreme Court  hold to  the  opinion that  the
First  amendment  justified  Barenblatt  in  his  refusal  to
answer  .  .  .  surely  a  person  untrained  in  the  law can-
not  justly  be  thought  to  be  incompetent  for  entertain-
ing  a  like  opinion and  acting  on  it."
This  recalls  the  pleadings  in  the  pending  Braden  and
Wilkinson   First   amendment   contempt   cases.     Both
claimed  that  since  they  invoked  the  First  before  Baren-
blatt,  relying  on  Watkins,  they  could  not  be  held "wil-
fully"  to  have  committed  contempt.
organizations  had better  put the heat  on.    ...
John  Cramer,  whose  "9  to  4:30" column  in  the  Washing-
ton  Daily  News   covers  news  of   government   workers, pub-
lished  a pathetic letter Dec.  6 from a  "cleared"  security  suspect
complaining  that  despite  clearance   Government   officials   and
often  private  employers  are  afraid  to  hire  him.  "The cleared
risk,"   Mr.  Cramer  commented,   "remains   guilty—even   after
proven  innocent."  . . .
major  modifications" to  appease  the  Southerners  and  to  "fore-
stall  any  fight  over  the  Rules  committee."    Labor  and  welfare
Many   Thanks   for   Messages   Coming   in   With   Renewals  —  Please   Forgive   Inability    to   Answer   Personally
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name   ....................—•——.—•—————————————  ••——•—"••
Street   .....................................-••••-•••••••••»•-•-•••-•••-••••••••••
Citv      ................................
'
12/12/60
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................•••••••-••••••••••••••••••••••
City   ..........................................Zone............St»te....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tea  D    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C..  nnder  the  Act  of  March  >.  18T9.   Port-dated  Monday*  but  publlabed  erery  Thurs-
day  except  the  hut  two  Thursday,  of  August  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.   An  Independent   weekly
published  and  edited  by  L  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  In  the  O.  a;    «  In
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall  rates:   *15  to   Europe:    (20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED