I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960feb22.pdf

============================================================

First  Amendment Martyrs,  P.  3
Silence  Here  But  Angry  Debate  in  British  Commons  Over  Atomic  Arms  for  Germany,  See  Page  2
/. K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  7
FEBRUARY  22,  1960
101
       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
No  More  Testing   — Except  in  Heaven   and  Hell
A   more  superstitious  age  would   say  that   the   President's
nuclear  treaty proposal  would  end  all  testing  except  in  heaven
and  hell.   The  basic objection  to  the  President's  nuclear treaty
proposal   is  that  it  would  allow  a  resumption  of  the  atomic
arms  race  underground  and  in  outer  space.    It  was  presented
as  if  it  merely  envisaged  a  little  marginal  testing.    But   the
President's  vague  words  about  testing  below  a  certain  thres-
hold  in  the  earth  and  beyond  a  certain  threshold   in  the  skies
sound  less  innocuous  when  read  against  the  backdrop  of   the
speech  made  by  Dr.  Edward  Teller,  "father  of  the   H-bomb,"
in  New  York  only  a  few  weeks  ago  on  receiving  an  award
from  Fordham.    "We  must  continue our  advance  in  nuclear
explosives,"   Dr.   Teller  said  on  that  occasion,  Jan.   26,  "by
testing  in  interplanetary space  and  underground"  in  order  to
develop  those  "more  refined  weapons  .  .  .  that  can  be  used
in  a  discriminating fashion."    This  Pied  Piper  of  the  nuclear
era  plays  only  the  most  humane  tunes.    "Everyone  knows  the
potential  fury  of  a  nuclear  bomb  from  the  tragedy  of  Hiro-
shima,"  Dr.  Teller  said,  "but  few  people  realize  the   potential
use  of  nuclear  arms  for  the  kind  of  defense  which  will  not
leave  the   countryside  [only  the   cities?]   in   ruins."     These
morally  blind  scientists  must  somehow  be  leashed  before  they
perfect  their  new  weapons  and  the  rest  of  us  out  of  existence.
The  President's  proposal  would  allow  them  free   rein  again.
Shooting Star or Nuclear Rocket?
Were  the  Russians  to  accept  this  proposal,  its  application
would  provide  a  rich  source  of  recrimination,  suspicion  and
tension.    Let  us  begin  with  outer  space.    The  White   House
statement  about  the  proposal  (the  actual text  is still  withheld)
says  this  would  "ban  all  tests  above  ground  up  to  the  greatest
heights  to  which  effective  controls  can  now  be  agreed."    Last
summer  East-West  scientists  held  a  special conference  on  outer
space   tests.     They   agreed   July   10   on   satellite  monitoring
systems  which  could  detect  explosions  "hundreds  of  millions
of  kilometers  from  the  earth."    The  Russians  accepted  their
recommendations  August  10  and  the  West  August  26.    Is  all
this  to  be  reopened  again?    Or  will  we  be  spending   millions
of   dollars   in  an  effort   to  test  weapons  even  further  out   in
space?   Will  our  scientific  madmen  shift  from   interplanetary
to  intergalactic testing?    And  if  we fall  short  and  are  detected,
what  do  we  do—say  excuse  it  please?    Will  every   sudden
shooting  star  give  rise  to  suspicion  and  spread  the  Cold   War
to  the  Milky  Way?
Underground  the  situation  would  be  as  unstable.    By  fixing
the  threshold   in  terms  of  earthquake   equivalent   magnitudes
instead  of  kilotons,  we  place  a  limit  difficult  to  determine  and
police.    U.S.  and  Soviet  scientists  disagree  on  the  proper  way
to  determine  these  magnitudes.   That  is one  source  of  dispute.
The  other  is  that,  however   estimated,   the   magnitude   of  a
specific  kiloton  shot  may  vary  widely  depending   on  the   type
The Way to  An Agreement
Q.  (Chalmers M. Roberts,  Washington  Post): Assum-
ing  that  the  Soviet  Union  would  accept  this  proposal,
during  the  period  of  the  development  of  new  techniques
to  extend  the  ban  on  certain  of  the  underground  test
problems,  would the  U.S.  during  that  period resume  un-
derground  testing?
A.  Well,  I—it's  a  question  that,  of  course,  itself  has
not  yet  been  resolved  .  .  .  that  is  something   that  we
would  have  to  decide  with  our  own  allies.
—Eisenhower  press  conference,  Feb.  11.
"The    British  have  been  strongly  in  favor  of  accom-
panying  the  limited  treaty  proposal  with  a  suggestion
for   a   moratorium  on   small-scale  tests.    Washington
would not agree. .. . One British source  said if  the Rus-
sions  accepted  the  limited  treaty  now,  it   would  take
about  three years to establish  the necessary  controls and
by  that  time  science  would  be  able  to  detect  all  tests."
—New  York  Times  from  Geneva, Feb.  12.
".  .  .  the  Soviet  delegate,  while  emphatically and re-
peatedly  insisting  that  all  tests  must  be  banned, indi-
cated  that  Moscow's  plans  for  a  treaty  that  would  in
itself  ban  all  tests  might  not  be  the  last  word.
"The  idea  of  a  treaty  plus  a  moratorium, he  told  re-
porters,  would  be  'a  different  thing'  and  'would  have  to
be considered.'"
—New  York  Times  from  Geneva, Feb.  IS.
of  earth  in  which  it  is  set  off  and  the  kind  of  muffling  which
can  be  applied  to  it.    We   say  our  threshold  figure  of  4.75
magnitude  is  the  equivalent  of  about  20  kilotons   but  this  is
based  on  one  shot   in  the  rather  soft   earth  of   our   Nevada
testing  site.    Shots  in  different   soils,  at  different   depths  and
with  different  muffling  may  have  a greater or  lesser magnitude.
Dr.  Teller   and  his  colleagues  would  be  urging   us  to   spend
hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars digging  "big  holes"  in  which
they  would  claim  that  shots  of  50  or  100  kilotons  could  be
made  to  appear  smaller  in  magnitude than  that  now  associated
with   20  kilotons.     Since  testing   below   the   4.75    threshold
would  be  permitted,  there  would  be  no  need  to  conceal  the
digging   and   earthwork   from   surveillance.     A   race   would
begin  to  build  bigger  and  deeper  holes  to  muffle  ever  larger
shots   below  the  threshold,   while  disputes   would   grow   over
whether  they violated  the  agreed  upon  limit.   This  proposal—
which  has  Senate   Democratic   heads   waggling   in   bipartisan,
accord,  even  Humphrey  calling  it  "forthright   and  workable"
(though  suggesting  a  moratorium  with  it)—is  a  recipe  for  a
perpetual  squabble.    It  suggests   a  mechanism  engineered,   as
it  were,  to  guarantee  a  swift  breakdown.   One  can  almost  read
the  label,   "Money   refunded  if  this  machine  fails  to   collapse
in   30  days."
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  22, 1960
Selections  from  A  Two-Pay  House  of  Commons  Debate  Poorly  Reported  in  Our Press
What  Britain's  Labor  Party  Had  to  Say  of  Nuclear  Arms  for  Germany
The  misgivings  expressed  in  the  House  of  Commons   for-
eign  policy  debate  Feb.   10-11   about  giving  nuclear  arms  to
the  Germans  contrast  sharply  with  the  wide  silence  on  the
subject   in  our  own  Congress  where  West  Germany  has  be-
come  a  sacred  cow.   Since  the  debate  was  poorly  covered  in
our  own  press,  we  provide  excerpts  here  from  the  parlia-
mentary   reports  in  The  Times  of   London   Feb.   11-12.   The
Laborite   members  quoted  below  also  speak  for  a  voiceless
minority  in  this  country,  and  their  influence  at  home  is  not
to  be  measured  by  the  lopsided  322-233  vote  by  which  their
motion  was  defeated.   A  majority  won by  the  Conservatives
on  a  pledge  actively  to  seek  for  peace  and disarmament  is
now  being  used  to  steamroller  objections  to  acquiescing  in
Washington-Bonn  axis  policies  which   move  toward  a  step-
ping  up  of  world  tension.   Why  not  send  this  page  to  your
Senators  and  Congressman  and  ask  why  they  can't  speak
up,  too,   against  nuclear  arms  for  the  Germans?—IPS
Mr.  HEALEY   (Opening  for  the  Opposition):  The  year
I960  would  prove  a  turning  point  in  the  history  of  interna-
tional  relations,  perhaps  in  the  history of  the  human  race  .  .  .
If  there  was  to  be  a  failure  at  the  summit  conference  there
was  a  danger  that  destructive  factors  in  international   affairs
would   take  control  of  the  policies  of  both  sides,  and   there
would  be  a  revival of  the  arms  race  between  the  U.S.  and  the
Soviet  Union  in  a  new and  even  more  dreadful  form  .  .  .
There  was  total   paralysis  in   the  pre-summit   negotiations
among  the  western  powers.    There  were  signs  that  Dr.  Ade-
nauer  and  President  de  Gaulle  only  agreed  to  the  conference
in  May  when  they  were  satisfied  that  there  was  no  chance  of
it  indulging  in  genuine  negotiations.
The  agreement  of  NATO  to  supply  western  Germany   with
atomic  arms  represented   almost  an  abdication  of  reason.  .  .
The   main   purpose   of   NATO's   ground   forces   in   central
Europe,  in  case  of  a  substantial Russian  attack,  was  to  enforce
a  pause,  so that  during  this  pause  the  Russians would  have  to
decide  whether  or  not  to  make  it  all-out  war.
But  what  sort  of  pause  could  NATO  hope  to  enforce  if
the  German  forces,  on  whose  territory they  would  be  fighting,
possessed  weapons  which were capable of  dropping  a  hydrogen
bomb  on  Warsaw  and  on  Moscow?  .  . .
One Way to  Steal  Atomic  Secrets
The  system  of  dual  control   could  not  give  anybody  much
comfort.    Units  which  controlled  delivery  must  from  time  to
time  have  the  opportunity   of  fitting  the  warheads  into   the
delivery   vehicle,   and   in   the   course   of   this   exercise   they
were  liable  to  obtain   the   information  which  would   enable
them  to  duplicate the  warheads,  given  time  .  .  .
Perhaps  the  most  serious  danger  of  all  was  shown  by  the
fact  that  east  Germany  had  already  publicly  stated  that  if  these
weapons  were  supplied  to  west  German  forces  it  would  seek
the  right  to  obtain  similar  weapons  from  Russia.    The  situa-
A  Sprout  That  Thrives  on Blood
''Exercise  Wintershield  showed  that  the  new  German
Army  still  has  some  major  problems.   But  it  has  some
extremely    capable,   aggressive   commanders   and   non-
coms,  and  the  seeds  of  its  past  military   greatness  are
sprouting  again."
—Hanson   W.  Baldwin,  summing  up   the  new  joint
U.S.-German  army  maneuvers,  Feb.   11.
Text  of  the  Labor  Party  Motion
"That  this  House,  deeply  concerned  to  ensure  that  the
disarmament  negotiations  and  summit  talks  shall  result
in   real   progress  towards   stopping  the  arms  race  and
ending  the  cold  war,  regrets  the  failure  of  the  Govern-
ment  to  advance  and  sustain  practical  proposals  to  this
end  and,  in  particular,  calls  upon  them  to  press  for  the
limitation  and  control  of  forces  and  weapons  in  central
Europe  as  a  first  step  towards  a  wider  political  settle-
ment  in  that  area  and  as  a  means  of  relaxing  tension
over  Berlin;  and further  deplores  the  fact  that  the  Gov-
ernment  has  consented  to  the  steps  that  are being  taken
towards  the  arming  of  west  German  forces  with  nuclear
weapons  before  the  summit  talks  have  been  held,  there-
by  prejudicing   their  prospects  of  success."
—House  of  Commons, Feb.  10.
tion  in  Europe  would  become  inevitably  more  dangerous   if
both   sides  in   a  divided  Germany,  bitterly   opposed   to   one
another  in  ideals,  policies  and  social  structure   had  each   the
power  to  start  the  type  of  atomic  conflict  which  would  engulf
the  whole  world  in  war.
Mr.  IDWAL  JONES:  Who  in  Britain  15  years  ago  would
have  imagined  that  he  would  live  to  see  the  day  when   the
west  would   be  rearming  Germany   with   the   most   powerful
and  dangerous  weapons  that  modern  science  could   provide?
Mr.  SYDNEY   SILVERMAN: ...  Dr.  Adenauer  had
said  in  an  interview with  the  Pope,  "Our  German  soldiers  are
the  soldiers  of  God."     Let  the  Germans  not  be  the  soldiers
of   God;   let   them   be  God's  missionaries  for   peace   in   the
world,  and  so  atone  for  some  of  the  crimes  of  the  German
past  generation.
Mr.  ALLAUN:  The  key  issue  in  the  debate  was  whether
they  should  give  nuclear  weapons  to  Germany ...  If  mem-
bers  asked  their  constituents,  the  answer  in  nine  cases  out  of
ten  would  be  that  they  should  not  even  be  given   pea-shooters.
Miss  JENNIE   LEE  (Mrs.  Aneurin  Bevan):  It  was  a  dis-
quieting  fact  that  the  same  policy  of  appeasement  was  being
pursued  towards  Dr.  Adenauer  as was pursued  towards  Hitler.
There  were  many  ordinary  Germans  who  did  not  know  what
was  going  on  in  Hitler's  Germany,  but  could  it  be  said  that
the  great  industrialists  who  backed  Hitler  did  not  know.   Just
as  they  backed  Hitler  they  were  now  backing  Dr.   Adenauer.
They   supplied   the   funds   for   his  last   election,   and   Britain
was  now  faced  with  the  same  thrusting,  arrogant  herrenvolk
in  charge  of  the  destinies  of  western  Germany  as  in  the  days
when  Hitler was rising  to  power.
Mr.  GAITSKELL  (Closing  for  Labor):  What  conceivable
justification   was  there   for   allowing   the   Mace,   a  rocket   de-
signed  to  travel  900  to   1,000   miles  to  be  in  the   possession
of  the Germans?  .  .  . The  picture  of  the  Germans  as a  people
who might  become  filled  with  hatreds  and  inferiorities   because
they  were   denied   nuclear   weapons   was  really   wide   of   the
mark ...  He  had  a  number  of  friends  in  Germany,  and  they
did  not  strike  him  as  suffering  from  an  inferiority  complex.
What  worried  them   most  was  the   prospect   of   a  return   of
militarism  in  Germany  and  they  were  not  in  favor  of   Ger-
many  having  nuclear   weapons.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  22, I960
Portrait  of  Paul  Rosenkrantz  the  Un-American  Committee's  First  Amendment  Victim  No.  4
Something Wrong With A Society That Sends A Gifted  Man Like This to Jail
A  society  may  be  judged  by  the  kind  of  people  it  sends  to
jail.    This  week  we  would  like  to  introduce our  readers  to  a
man  named  Paul  Rosenkrantz.    He   is  the  fourth  and   least
known  of  the  First  Amendment defendants to  go  to  jail  since
November  10  for  contempt  of  the  House  Un-American Activi-
ties  Committee.    It  is  worth  making  his  acquaintance.
Mr.  Rosenkrantz  is  a  foreign  born  workingman  who  de-
cided  at  the  age  of  40  to  go  back  to  college.     He  was  born
in  Russia  in   1916   and  came  here  in  1932.    He  had  been  a
packing  house  worker,  a  salesman,  a  seaman  and  a  Westing-
house   electrical   worker.     He   was   married  and   had   three
daughters  when  he  entered   Springfield  (Mass.)   College   in
1956.    He  graduated  two years later  magna  cum laude.   When
such   men   become   "jailbirds"   for   political   reasons   there   is
something  wrong  with   the   society   in  which  they  live.
A  few  months  before  graduation  in  1958,  Mr.  Rosenkrantz
was  summoned  before  the  House  Committee  in  Boston.     He
told  the  Committee  he  had  been  a  member  of  the  Communist
party  but   refused  to   identify   the  branch  to  which  he   had
last  belonged   on  the  ground  that  this  would   lead  directly  to
a  demand  that  he  name  others.
It  is  a  measure  of  Mr)  Rosenkrantz's  promise  and   of   the
Woodrow   Wilson  Foundation's  courage  that  it  awarded  him
a  fellowship   for  further  study  despite  his  appearance   before
the  Committee.    Mr.  Rosenkrantz  was  in  his  second  year  of
graduate   work  for  a  doctorate  in  psychology   at  Clark   Uni-
versity  when  Federal  Judge  Wyznanski  on  Dec.  9  last  found
him  in  contempt.
The   judge  turned   down   a   request   that   the   sentence   be
stayed  until  June,   1961,  to  permit  Mr.  Rosenkrantz  to  finish
Mathematician  Victim No. 3
'We  hope  to  restore   the  reputability  of  dissent.   I
think  such  an  effort  is  sufficiently  important to  risk  ex-,
treme  measures.  It  was  an  extreme  measure  for  me  to
risk  jail.   I  won't  enjoy  it.   But  it  will  be  a   satisfaction
to   affirm   by   this   act   that   I   value  free   speech   this
highly."
—Dr. H.  Chandler  Davis,  the  third  First   Amendment
defendant   jailed  for  contempt  of  the  Un-American  Com-
mittee.  Dr. Davis  was a  mathematics   instructor  at  the
Univ.  of  Mich.,  when  he  refused    to  answer   questions
about  the  authorship  of  a  pamphlet  attacking  the  Com-
mittee.   The  Univ.  of  Mich.  dismissed  him  but  he  later
taught  at  Columbia  and  then  accepted  a  one-year   fel-
lowship   at   the  Institute   for   Advanced   Studies.   Dr.
Davis   began  serving   a  0-month  jail  sentence   Feb.  %
after   Federal  Judge   Wallace  Kent,  in  Grand   Rapids,
Mich.,  denied  a  motion  for  reduction   in  sentence   sup-
ported  by  an  American  Mathematical   Society      affidavit
that  Di:  Davis's  services  were  irreplaceable.   Dr. Davis,
who  reads  six  languages, has  been editing   Mathematical
Reviews,  which  covers  the  world's  literature  on mathe-
matics.
his  graduate work.   This  may be  sound  law  but  it  makes  little
sense  in  a  country  which  needs  more  trained  scholars,  unless
indeed  at  this  stage  of  our  history  it  was  more   important   to
send   Mr.   Rosenkrantz  without  delay  to  Danbury   Prison.
The    succession   of    jailed   First   Amendment    defendants
(some  30  more  are  on  the  way)  may  help  to  drive  home  the
menace  of   this  committee's   pestilential   power   to   a   society
that   likes  to  think  of  itself  as  intensely  devoted   to   freedom
but  has  shown  a  yawning  indifference   to  it.
A  Test  Offer  That  Cast  New  Light  on  the  Frankfurter  "Balancing" Doctrine
Two   aspects   of   Mr.   Rosenkrantz's   case   merit   attention.
He   went   to   jail  without   appealing.      After   the   Barenblatt
decision,  he  did  not  have  faith  enough  in  the  Supreme  Court
to  go  through  the  trouble  and  expense  of  an  appeal.
The   other   aspect   is  the   light   cast  by  an  incident  of   the
case  on  the  rationalization with  which  the  Court  has  given  its
approval  to  the  Committee.     Mr.  Rosenkrantz  had  pleaded
nolo  contendere,  i.e.,  he  simply  declined  to  answer  the  charge
of   contempt.     Judge  Wyzanski  had   accepted   the   plea   but
deferred  sentence,  suggesting  that  he  purge   himself.
The   defendant   then   wrote   the   Committee,    offering   to
answer  any  questions  about  his  own  activities and  any   "per-
tinent"   questions   about  the  party  branch  to  which  he   once
belonged, but reserving his right not to answer other  questions.
The  Committee  replied  that  he  could  appear  voluntarily  but
would   not   issue  a  subpoena.     Mr.   Rosenkrantz  said   it  was
against  his  principles  to  appear  as a voluntary  witness.   There-
upon,  on  Feb.  3,  Judge  Wyzanski  imposed  a  3-month  sentence
and  on  Feb.  8  Mr.  Rosenkrantz  went  to  jail.
In  the  Barenblatt   case  the  Supreme  Court   5-to-4  adopted
the  Frankfurter  doctrine  that  the  First  Amendment  was   "out
balanced"  by  "national  security"  when  the  Committee  sought
information   essential   to   the   nation's   safety.
Why    didn't    the   Committee    question   Mr.   Rosenkrantz
again  if  it  needed  such  vital  information?    If  the  information
Not  THAT Mature
"The  questions  came  from  a  crowded floor ...  in  a
Los   Angeles   ballroom.    Most   of   the   questions  were
friendly,   but  some  had  the  smell  of  animosity.
" 'Now  that  you have  matured,' a  student editor called
out,  'will  you  use  your  influence  to  abolish  the  House
Un-American  Activities  Committee'?"
"The  Vice  President repeated the  question so  all  could
hear,  then  sent  a  thundering  answer  across   the  hall.
'The  answer  is  no,'  he  said."
—New  York  Herald-Tribune,  Feb.  14.
it  wanted  was  important enough  to  suspend  the  First  Amend-
ment  and  send  this  gifted  man  to  jail,  it  should   have  been
important   enough   for   another   subpoena.     The   Committee
could  then  have  demonstrated  by the  character  of  its  questions
that  it  was  not  trying  to  punish  a  man  for  his  past  political
views   but   was   concerned   with   obtaining   information   that
involved  some  wrongful  and  dangerous  act.
The   Committee's   indifference   supplies   its  own   comment.
"I  felt,"  Mr.  Rosenkrantz  said  before  going  to  jail,  "that  if
the  Committee's  interest  was  so  small  that  it  wasn't  worth  a
subpoena,  that  the  information  they  sought  was  not   anything
they  genuinely  needed."    The  Committee's   real  interest,  like
McCarthy's,   is  in  smearing  people  or  sending   them   to  jail.
It  is running a  public  pillory  not  an  inquiry.
2    3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's   Weekly,  February  22, 1960
After  France,  Other  Recruits  to  Nuclear  Club  May  Make  the  Situation  Hopeless
Three  Ways  Are  Still  Open  to  A  Nuclear  Test  Agreement
(Continued  from  Page  One)
There  are  several  ways  to  reach  an  agreement   at   Geneva.
jOne  (see  page one  box)  is to  offer  a moratorium on  all  testing
with  the  President's  proposal   and  during  that  period   pursue
joint  research  on  means  of  detection.    The  second  lies  in  the
new  Russian  offer  to  waive  all  scientific  criteria  on   inspection
provided   there   is  agreement  on   a  quota  allowed   each  year.
This  means  that  if  we  suspect  a  shot  has  taken  place  we  can
inspect   within   our   quota   without  having   to   prove   to   the
Russians  by  instrument  readings  that  the   event  was  not   an
jearthquake.     Tsarapkin    (according    to   a   dispatch    on   the
Reuters  ticker  Feb.   16)   took  up  a  proposal  first  made  by  Sir
iMichael  Wright  in  the  Geneva  talks  Jan.  15  (London   Times,
Jan.   16).     The   British  delegate  suggested   that  criteria  for
inspection   be  made  provisional  until   after   there   had   been
two  or  three  years experience with  the  working  of  the  system.
Tsarapkin   offered  to  make  the  quota  provisional,  too,  subject
io  renegotiation  after  a  few  years experience.
Why  Rush  That  Treaty?
;    There   is  another   route  which  makes  more   sense  than   to
rush  a  treaty to  the  Senate  and  risk rejection  before  the  subject
has been  fully  explored.    That  is to  continue  a  3-power  mora-
torium  on  testing  while  setting  up  a  joint  agency  for  research
in   improving  means  of   detection.     It   is  scandalous  that   so
little  has  been   and   is  being   done   about   the   improvements
recommended   to   the  White   House   last   March   16   by   the
B.erkner  panel.    This  panel  of  leading  seismologists  outlined
i. 3-year program  of  research  and  development  which  (it  said)
would   restore   to   full    efficiency    the   170-station   inspection
system  agreed  upon  in  1958  at  Geneva,  i.e.  able  to  distinguish
90  percent  of  the  earthquakes  from  nuclear  explosions  above
the  5-kiloton  range.    In  addition  (see  box  this  page)  it  con-
cluded  that  a  network  of  unmanned  stations  could  raise  this
efficiency   to   the   point  of   distinguishing  98   percent   of   the
earthquakes  from  nuclear  explosions  above  one  kiloton!   The
Russians,  who  were  very  suspicious  of  unmanned  stations  last
summer,   seem   to   have   switched   their   position,   and   their
delegates   at  the   recent  parliamentary  "foothills"   conference
in  London  accepted  a  resolution  calling   for   the   use  of   un-
Unmanned Stations Can Solve Detection
Problem
"In addition to  the  improvements discussed  above,  the
augmentation  of  the  Geneva  net  with  an  auxiliary  net-
work  of  unmanned seismic  stations  offers  the  possibility
of  major  improvement in  the  capability  to  discriminate
between  earthquakes  and  explosions.    For  example,  if
unmanned  stations  were  spaced  at  170  kilometer inter-
vals  in  and  adjacent  to  the  seismic  areas  of  the  world,
about  98  percent  of  the  events  as  small  as  one  kiloton
equivalent,  would  be  identified  by  this   system."
—Berkner  Panel  Summary  Released  June  12, 1959
"It  is  very  strange  that  the  recent meeting  of  experts
at  Geneva (Technical  Working  Group  2)  seems  never  to
have   discussed   the   use   of   supplementary  unmanned
seismic  stations  as  a  method of  increasing  the capability
of  a  test  detection  system.  .  .  .
"Unmanned  stations,  at  intervals  of  100  miles, would
give  signals  at  least  200  times  as  strong  as  those  pro-,
duced  at  manned  stations  at  the  specified  separation  of
600  miles."
—E.H.S.  Bin-hop   (Prof,    of  Physics,  London    Univ.)
in  letter  to  The  Times   (London)   Feb.  13.
manned  stations  as  a  supplement  to  the  Geneva  system.    On
the  Senate  side,  Humphrey has  been  trying to  get  clear  answers
from  the  Defense  Department  on  just  what  happened   to  the
Berkner  panel  recommendations.    On  the  House  side,  Porter
of  Oregon   Feb.  16  criticized  the  President's  plan  and  called
attention   to   the   foot-dragging   of   Defense   Dept.   on   these
recommendations.    He  charged  that  our  delegation  at  Geneva
was   instructed   not   to  bring  up   the   question  of  unmanned
stations.     But  elsewhere  there  is  silence  or  approval.     It  is
almost  as  if  we  had   a  one-party system.
The   French  explosion,  which  alarmed  millions   in   Africa
and  Asia,  must  have  brought  a  certain  smug  contentment  in
many  quarters  of   our  military  and   scientific  bureauracy.    If
they  can only  hold  out  long  enough,   blocking  agreement   with
new   technical   obstacles,   the   nuclear  power   club   will   soon
grow  to  the  point  where  no  international  agreement  will  be
possible.    How  Teller and  the  military  must  long  for  that  day!
Extra  Copies  This  Issue  Available  in  Bulk  Orders  for   Wider   Distribution  at  3  Cents  Per  Hundred   or   More
I.  F.
Please
Name
Street
City
•    Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
........................................Zone............
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
we  send  gift  announcement?
"""""i'/vi/m
yr.)   additional:
Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
Entered  as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  187!).    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
sday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   ofilS  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  \V..  Washington  15.  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by  1.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
"                    ''
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  A
.                         .               .
jr,  in   the   IT.  S. :  $«   in  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.     Air  Mail  rates:  $l"i   tn  Europe:   S'-'O  to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED