I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960mar14.pdf

============================================================

The  Un-Ams  Dabble  in  Racism, P.  4
14  Democratic   Congressmen  Call  for  4-Power  Talks  to  Block  Spread  of  Nuclear  Weapons,  Page  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  10MARCH  14,  I960
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The Democrats  Begin  to Veer  Away  from  The  Arms  Race
In   1928,   that   ill-fated   year,   the   Republicans  campaigned
on   the   promise  of   putting  two   cars   in   every  garage.     Up
until  last  week   it  began  to  look   as  if   the   Democrats  were
going  to  campaign  this  year  on  the  promise  of  putting  two
missiles  in  every  backyard.    In  the  current  uproar  over  alleged
military   deficiencies,   the   Democratic  party   was  well   on   its
way  to  becoming  the  party of  panic and  confusion,  the  sound-
ing  board  of  the  aviation-missiles  industry,  the  court  of  last
resort  for  dissatisfied  Generals  and  Admirals,  the  party  of  an
intensified  arms  race.   The  United  States presented the  strange
and   illuminating  spectacle  of   the   only capitalist-democratic
power   in  which  the  more  liberal  party  was  less  friendly   to
disarmament   than   the   conservative.    This   reflects   the   eco-
nomic  interest  of  our  labor  movement  in  the  arms  race,  the
opposition  of  the  Roman  Catholic  hierarchy  (more  powerful
in  the  Democratic  than  the  Republican  party)  to  relaxation of
world  tension,  the  inflationary   tendencies  historically charac-
teristic  of   the  Democrats   and  the  vested   emotional   interest
of  the  Truman-Acheson  leadership  in  the  cold  war  it fathered
with  its  Stalin-Molotov   opposite  number.
Kennedy's Maiden Effort  Superb
The  first  welcome  signs  of  a  change  began  to  appear  last
week.     An  anxiety  at  the  grass  roots   is  beginning  to  make
itself  felt  among  the  younger  and  more  independent  men  in
the  party.    Clark  (D.  Pa.),  one  of  the  most  thoughtful  men
in   the   Senate,   began   sounding  out   colleagues   on   the   need
to  counterbalance  the  speeches  on  military  deficiency  orches-
trated   by  Symington   with   a   day  on   which   the   Democrats
would  stress  the  Administration's  weakness  in  preparing   for
the  Geneva  arms  talks  and  outline  a  party  policy  on disarma-
ment.     A   statement   signed   by   Clark   and   Humphrey    (as
chairman  of  the  Senate  disarmament  subcommittee)  was  cir-
culated  last  week-end.    It  warned  that  "in  some  quarters  the
Democrats  are  said  to  be more  concerned  with  military defense
and   preparations   for   war   than  with   positive   programs   for
peace   and   disarmament"   and   suggested   that  to   correct  this
impression   "a  policy  statement  and   discussion  by  Democrats
on  arms  control  is  essential."    Despite  some  coolness  on  the
part  of  Lyndon  Johnson,  it  was  decided  after  discussions  with
Kennedy   and   Symington   to   stage   such   a  discussion   in  the
Senate  last  Tuesday.     Unfortunately  personal  rivalry  between
Humphrey  and  Kennedy  led  the  latter  to  make  his  speech  in
Durham,-  New  Hampshire,   last  Monday  instead,  and   though
he  was  in  Washington  Tuesday,  Kennedy  did  not  participate.
It  is a pity because  his  speech,  his  maiden  effort  in  the  general
field  of  disarmament,*  a  topic  to  which  he  had  hitherto  paid
little  attention',   was  superb.    The  text'was  put  into  the  Con-
gressional  Record  Monday  by  Clark.
The  appearance  of  Kennedy  in  an  arena  where   Humphrey
has  performed   in  spendid  if  wistful   isolation   for  five  years
is  a  major  break-through.    It  means  that  all  the  Democratic
The  Only  Hope for  A Sick  World
"When  a  country  spends  over  $100 billion  a  year  for
weapons  which   everyone   hopes  it   will   never  have  to
use  .  .  .  weapons  in  a  war  that  no  one  could  win  .  .  .
this  is  a  clear  mark of  a kind  of  mental  sickness  in  the
world   that   necessitates   some  very  careful   treatment
and  the  treatment  that  I  propose  is  to  slow  down  the
arms  race ...  to  disarm  the  international  atmosphere
of  the  fear  and  the  hysteria  which  grip  it."
—Humphrey   (D.  Minn.)   in  the  Senate,  March  8.
"No  leader  of   any  nation  should  rest  content  with
this  precarious equilibrium  of  terror.   No  nation  should
delude  itself   into  thinking  it   has   a  strategy  for   the
1960's  if  that  strategy  is  nothing  more  than  the  arms
race.  .  .  .  The  world  of  1960  .  .  .  requires  a  new  and
different  look.  .  .  .  Today's  international climate,  more
than  ever  before,  holds  out  the  possibility for  an  effec-
tive  start  on arms control.   For the  Russians know .  .  .
as  well  as  we  know  that  a  war  of  mutual  destruction
would  benefit   no  nation  or  ideology.  .  .  .  Peace  pro-
grams  involve  risks  .  .  .  but  risks  of  arms  are  even
more   dangerous.  .   .   .   There   is   no   greater   defense
against   total   nuclear   destruction  than  total  nuclear
disarmament."
—Kennedy   (D.  Mass.)   at  Durham,  N.  H.,  March  7.
hopefuls  must  now  take  a  position  on  disarmament, and  even
Symington  has  a  speech   ready  on  the  subject  which  he  in-
tended  to  make  Tuesday  but  was  unable  to  because  the  hour
was late and  the  cloture petition about  to  be  filed.  Humphrey
delivered  a  full-dress  speech  on  disarmament.   The  Humphrey
and  Kennedy  positions  are  much  alike,  in  stressing  the  poor
preparations  of  the  Administration  for  the  renewed  arms  talks
and   the  need   for   some  new   "Peace   Agency"   (Humphrey)
or   "Arms   Control   Research   Agency"   (Kennedy)   to    stucTy
such  problems  as  nuclear  test  detection.  Clark and  Humphrey
are  trying  to  find  a  common  denominator  for   the   party  by
saying  that  higher  military  spending  must  be  coupled  with
real  negotiations for  disarmament.   This  "arm  to  parley"  line
seems  an  effort  to  move in  opposite directions at  the  same time,
a  not  unfamiliar  campaign   feat,  but  marks  an  improvement
over  past  emphasis  on  the  arms  race  alone  as  the  only path  to
security.   The  dynamics of  the  campaign  may  shift  the  party's
position  and  exert  real  pressure  on  the  Administration, par-
ticularly  if  the  rumblings  of  discontent  from  the  rank-and-file
can   be   maintained   and   intensified.     We   applaud    Senator
Clark's   initiative  and   commend   Senator  Kennedy's  position.
* On  an  equally  high  level  was  Kennedy's  speech  last NOT.
2  at  UCLA in  California when  he  took  issue  with Rockefeller
on  testing,  saying  that  resumption  might  be  more  of  a  dis-
advantage  militarily  than  a help  and declaring,  "We  have  not
made  as  concentrated  an  effort  on  techniques  for  preserving
mankind  as  we  have  on  techniques  of  destruction."   The  text
was  not  made  available  here  at  the  time  and  we  have  just
seen it.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  U,  1960
The  Fallacies  Behind  the  Proposals   to  Give  Europe  An  "Independent  Deterrent"
London  Times  Military  Expert  States Case Against Nuclear  Arms  for NATO
We  present  here  in  slightly  abridged  form  the  most  strik-
ing  and  authoritative  analysis  we  have  seen  of  the  military
and political fallacies  underlying proposals  to  give  the NATO
nations   nuclear   arms,  either  directly  as   suggested   by  the
President,  or  in  the  form  of  a  NATO  nuclear  force  as  sug-
gested  by  General  Norstad.   This  appeared  in  The  Times  of
London   Feb.    11   under   the   heading   "Nuclear   Arms   for
NATO?"  with  the  by-line,  "From  Our  Defence  Correspon-
dent."
"There  seem  to  be  three  main  ideas  behind   these  sugges-
tions.    The  first  is  that,  to  make  the  western  deterrent  more
convincing,  nuclear  weapons  in  Europe  should  be  put  under
some   form   of   NATO,  as   opposed   to   American,  control.
Otherwise,   it   is  argued,   the   Russians   may   doubt   whether
America  would  risk  destruction  of  her  cities  to  save  Europe.
"The   second   idea,   that   some  form  of  NATO  control  is
necessary  to  promote  European  confidence  in  the  alliance,  is
complementary    to   the    first.    Europeans,   too,   may   doubt
whether   America  would   risk  suicide  on  their   behalf.
"The  third   idea   is  that   to   put   nuclear   weapons   under
NATO   might   be   a  useful   form   of   arms   control.     Other
NATO  countries  may  feel  driven  to  develop  nuclear  weapons
of  their  own.   Perhaps  this  might  be  avoided   if  the  NATO
nations  could  be  given  a  common  nuclear  capability.
A Recipe for Paralysis
"Analysis  of   the  first  idea  suggests  that  there   would   be
no  gain  in  the  credibility  of  the  deterrent  if  NATO  became
an  atomic  power.    Doubts  about  the  credibility of  the  present
Anglo-American  nuclear  forces  as  a  deterrent  to  conventional
aggression    against    Europe   are   understandable.     But   how
could  a  nuclear  deterrent,  the  use  of  which  would  be suicidal
for  Europe,  be  any  more  credible  if  it  was  controlled  by  up
to   15  nations  instead  of  by  one  or  two   as  at  present?     It
looks  like  a  recipe  for  paralysis.
"If  we  rule  this out, what  about  the  credibility of  a NATO
nuclear   force   as   a   deterrent   against   nuclear  aggression   in
Europe?"    It  could  hardly  be  more  credible  than  the  present
system  whereby  American  forces  are  deployed   on  the  Con-
tinent  and  are  bound  to  be  involved  in  any  conflict  there.
"There  are  two  components   to   any  deterrent,  credibility
and   effectiveness.     If  a  NATO  deterrent  could  not  increase
credibility,   could   it   increase   effectiveness?     Let   us   assume
that  the  European  countries  contribute  toward  its  cost.    How
.would  the  extra  money  be  spent?
"To  guarantee  retaliation  against  a  nuclear  attack  the  deter-
rent  weapons  would  have  to  be  able  to  survive  it.    Though
land-based  missiles  can  be  'hardened'  by  burying  them  and
surrounding  them  with  concrete,  they  are  still  vulnerable  to
a  fairly  accurate nuclear  attack.    British  experience  with  the
Thor  missile  sites  suggests  that  it  would  be  impossible to  keep
missile  bases  in  Europe  secret.    It  might  be  possible  to  attain
some  degree  of  invulnerability  by  sheer  numbers,  but  Europe
would  then  have  to  bristle  with  more  missile  sites  than  any
aggressor  could  find  missiles  to  destroy.    There  would  be  no
end  to  a  rat  race  of  this  kind.
"The  only  possibility  of  adding  to  the  effectiveness  of  the
deterrent  on  the  Continent  would   be  by  putting   it  to  sea.
Reasonable  invulnerability  might  be  attained  by  putting mis-
siles  on  submarines  to  keep  them  invisible, or  on  surface  craft
to  keep   them   elusive,   though   communications  would   be  a
serious   problem.
They'd Begin to Fear Each  Other
"This  affects  the  second  underlying  idea,  that  it  would  help
to  promote  European  confidence in  the  alliance.    The  govern-
ing  factor  here  would  be  how  much  (or  little)   control  was
vested   in  the  Continental   countries.     If   they  were   given   a
decisive  say, then  their  resentments  against  the  Anglo-Ameri-
can  nuclear  monopoly  ought  certainly  to  disappear.     But  in
their  place  they  would  probably  have  new   fears   about  each
other  because  the  hydrogen  bomb,  being  an  absolute  weapon,
calls  for  absolute  allies.    [Itajics  added].
"Finally  we come to  arms control.    No  one  can say whether
participation  in  a  common  deterrent  would  remove  from  other
NATO   countries  the   ambitions   or   fears   that   have   driven
Britain  and  France  to  develop  nuclear  weapons.    But  General
de  Gaulle  has  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  he  will  not  be
fobbed   oft  with   anything  short   of   complete   ouclear  inde-
pendence.     Two   things   are  clear   amid   these   uncertainties.
The  first  is that  the  establishment  of  a NATO deterrent  force,
•backed  by  America's  technical  resources,  would  place  a  great
many   more   nuclear   weapons   in   Europe   than   the   present
laborious  growth   of   independent  nuclear   possibilities   could
possibly  do.   This  could  affect  future  negotiations on disarma-
ment,  and  provoke  Russia  to  deploy  nuclear  weapons  in  the
satellite  countries.
"The   second  is  that  if  the  European  countries  contributed
to the  cost  of  the NATO deterrent  they would  almost  certainly
spend  that  much  less  on  their  conventional  forces,  which  are
the  bedrock  of  General  Norstad's  defenses.    Would  that  be
a  wise  exchange?"
14  Congressmen  Call  for  4-Power  Talks  to  Block  Spread  of  Atom  Weapons
"Whereas  the  dispersion  and transfer  of  nuclear  weapons
to  other  nations   will  decrease  the  chance  for   negotiating
effective   international   agreements   for   control   of   nuclear
weapons  . .  .  render  it  more  difficult  to  reach  agreement  on
disarmament  .  .  .  increase  the  chance  of  nuclear  accidents,
and  of  nuclear  irresponsibility  and  nuclear  blackmail  .  .  .
result  in  the heightening  of 'international  tensions  and .  .  .
threaten  the  survival  of  our  civilization,  and  of  the  human
race:  Now,  therefore,  be  it
"Resolved   by  the  Rouse   of  Representatives  (the   Senate
concurring),  That  it  is  the  sense  of  the  Congress  (1)   that
the  United  States  should  not  transfer  nuclear   weapons  or
nuclear  weapons  secrets  to  other  nations,  and  (2)  that  the
President   should  undertake  negotiations  immediately  with
the  Soviet  Union,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  France  to  seek
agreements  prohibiting the  transfer  of  nuclear  weapons  and
nuclear  weapons  secrets  from  one  nation  to  another."
—H.   Con.  Res.   598  (whereases   omitted)    by   Kowalski,
D.  Conn.;   Identical   Resolutions   by  Mrs.   Green,  D.   Ore.;
Johnson,  D.  Col;  Meyer,  D.  Vt.;  Roosevelt,  D.  Gal;    Wolf,
D.  Iowa;   Giaimo,  D.  Conn.;  Porter,  D.  Ore.;  Rivers,  D.
Ala.;   Lane,   D.  Mass.;   Levering,   D.   Ohio;   Clem   Miller,
D.  Cal.;   Dent,  D.  Pa.  and  Moeller,   D.  Ohio.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  14, 1960
Where  Could  They  Have  Gotten  That  Queer  Idea  We  Often  Support  Dictators?
Some  Sample  Misunderstandings  Ike  Corrected  in  Latin  America
"Another  persistent   misunderstanding  which  I  sought  to
correct  wherever  I  travelled  is  that   we  sometimes support
dictators.    Of  course  we  abhor  all  tyrannical  forms  of  gov-
ernment, whether of  the  left  or  right."
—Eisenhower  TV  report  on South  American  trip,  March  9.
"During   1952  the  Truman  Administration  apparently  had
few   qualms  about  singing   mutual  defense   assistance   pacts
with  the  dictatorial  regimes  then  in  power in  Cuba, Peru  and
Colombia,   and   the   Eisenhower    Administration   followed  a
similar  practice   with  the  Dominican  Republic   [Trujillo]   in
1953  and Nicaragua  in  1954  .  . .
"The  Eisenhower  Administration  has  gone  even  further  in
manifestations   of   open  support   for   authoritarian   military
regimes.   In  November  1954  President  Eisenhower  presented
Legion  of  Merit  citations  to  [two  dictators  since overthrown
Presidents  Odria   (Peru)   and  Perez   Jiminez   (Venezuela)].
—Post   World    War   11   Political   Developments   in  Latin
America,  Report  No.  1  to  Morse   (American  Republics)  sub-
committee  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations,  Nov.  19,  1959.
"In   Brazil,  I   explained  another   item  of  our  policy:  We
believe  in  the  right   of  people  to  choose  their  own  form  of
government ...  to  abide  by  their  own  philosophy."
—Eisenhower  on  his  South  American  trip,  March  8.
"There  are  many  ways  in  which  the  United  States  could
aid  Brazilian   development  without  resorting   to  balance  of
payments   loans.    For   example,  if  Petrobras,  the   Brazilian
Government  oil  monopoly,  had  additional  capital  to  expand
its  production  more  rapidly,  material  foreign  exchange  sav-
ings  could  be  made  through  a  reduction  in  oil  imports.   The
refusal  of  the  U.S.  to  deal  with  Petrobras,  simply  because  it
is  a  government  monopoly, seems  altogther  too  doctrinaire."
—Senator  Aiken  (R.  Vt.)  Report  on  trip  to Latin  America
for   Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  Feb.  2,  1960.
"When  internal  social  reform  is  required,  it  is  purely  an
internal   matter."
—Eisenhower  on  his  South  American   trip,  March  8.
"One  of  the  complaints  which  is  frequently  heard  about
the   United   States   in   Venezuela   and   elsewhere   in   Latin
America  is  that  it  views  liberal  reform  governments  askance
and  does  not  really  care  about  social  progress."
—Aiken's  report,  Feb.  2.
Russell's  Convert to Free Speech
Bertrand  Russell  may  take  satisfaction  in  an  unex-
pected  achievement.  His  debate  with  Edward  Teller  on
"Small   World"  the  past   two  Sundays  seems  to  have
converted  the  latter  into  a  passionate  libertarian.  Over
and  over  again,  Dr.  Teller  stressed  the  preservation  of
free  speech  as  an  issue  so  overriding  as  to  justify  the
use  of weapons which could  destroy  mankind. Dr.  Teller
has  never  before  displayed  an  interest  in  free  speech.
As  we  watched  Dr.  Teller  harping  on  an  issue  to
which  he has  always been  indifferent  in a  debate with  a
philosopher  who  has  fought  for  free  speech  all  his  life
and  gone  to  prison  for  it  (in  World  War  I),  we  were
reminded  of  the  story  about  King  Solomon  and  the  -two
women  who  claimed  the  same  child.   Solomon  shrewdly
offered  to  cut  the  child in  half  and  give  a  piece  to  each.
The  true  mother  revealed  herself  by  rejecting  this with.
horror  and  offering  to  give  up  the  child  instead.
Those  who  love  free  speech  are  not  so  ready  to  de-
stroy  the  only  kind of  a  world  in  which  it  may  flourish.
An  arms  race  between  two  garrison  states  is  hot  con-
ducive  to  intellectual   freedom.   The  military   bureau-
crats  and  apocalyptic  anti-Communists  for  whom  Dr.
Teller   speaks  are  the  enemies  of  freedom,  not  its  de-
fenders.
"One   of   the   most   far-reaching   problems  of   continental
scope  is  this  . . .  the Latin  American  countries  are largely
single  commodity  countries  . . . The real  solution  is  in agri-
cultural  and  industrial   diversification."
—Eisenhower  on  his  South  American  trip,  March  8.
"The  United  States  has  made  this  dilemma  unnecessarily
difficult  by  deliberately   selecting  the  kinds  of  production, it
will  help  to   increase.    The  emphasis  in   Bolivia  ought   to
be  on the  things  Bolivia needs  and  can  produce.   In  the  agri-
cultural  field,  these  include  wheat,  sugar,  rice,  and  cotton,
all  of  which  except  sugar,  are  surplus  in  the  United  States.
As  a  consequence, the  United  States  will  not  do  anything  to
help  with  their  production in  Bolivia,  despite  the  remoteness
of  the  prospect  of  ever  making  significant  commercial  sales
to  that   country."
—Senator  Morse   (D.  Ore.)  Report  on  his  South  American
trip  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  Feb.  80.
The  Bigger  Issue  Which  Lurks  Behind  the  Los  Angeles  Anonymous  Handbill  Case
Behind  the  bitterly  split  decision  in  the  Supreme  Court
last  Monday  holding  unconstitutional  a  Los  Angeles  ordi-
nance  forbidding  the  circulation  of  anonymous handbills  is
the  shadow of  a  bigger  issue  the  Court will  soon  face.  This
is  whether,  under  the  Internal   Security  Act  of   1950,   the
Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  can  force  publications
and   radio-TV casts  to  label  themselves  "communistic"  if  in
the  Board's  opinion  they  follow  party  line.
Mr.  Justice  Black's  decision  in  Talley  v.  California  con-
tains   an   eloquent   passage   on  the   part   that   anonymous
pamphleteering  played  in  the  English  and  American  Revo-
lutions.   "Persecuted  groups   and  sects,"  he  wrote,  "from
time  to  time  throughout  history  have  been  able  to  criticize
oppressive  practices  and  laws  either  anonymously or  not  at
all."    Mr. Justice  Harlan  concurred  on  the  ground  that  the
Los  Angeles  ordinance  was  not  limited  to  preventing  fraud
or  libel.
Mr.  Justices  Frankfurter    and  Whittaker   joined   in   the
dissent  by  Mr.  Justice  Clark  who  protested,   "the  Constitu-
tion  says  nothing   about   freedom   of  anonymous  speech."
The  theory  behind  the  "labelling"  provisions  of  the  Internal
Security  Act  is  that  the  government  may  label   dangerous
ideas  as  it  labels  dangerous  foods  and  drugs.  It  is  only one
step  from  requiring  the  source  to  be  identified  to  a  require-
ment  that  the  political  nature  of  the  source  also  be  dis-
closed.    A  government  board   like  the   SACB  would  then
determine  if  this  was  disclosed  correctly,   i.e.  whether   the
source  was  "communistic."   Thus  the  SACB could  police  the
written  and  spoken  word.
Mr.  Justice  Stewart   who  joined  the  liberals  in  the  Los
Angeles  case  may  be the  decisive vote when the  Konigsberg
case  reaches  the  Court  again.    Certiorari  was  granted  last
Monday.  California law  excludes from  the  bar  anyone  who
advocates    overthrow   of    the    government.     Konigsberg
denied   such   advocacy   but   refused   on   principle   to   say
whether  he  was  or  ever  had  been  a  Communist.  The  bar
examiners  held  this  showed  lack  of  good  moral  character.
The  Court  three  years  ago  reversed,  Black  for  the  majority,
Harlan,  Clark  and  Frankfurter  dissenting.   Whittaker,  new-
ly  appointed,  took  no  part,  but  sides  usually  with   them.
Burton  was  with  the  majority.   Stewart  has  since  replaced
him.   Konigsberg  was  given  a  new  hearing,  again  refused
to  answer  and  was  again  excluded,  advocacy  of  overthrow
being  inferred  from  refusal   to  answer  the  question.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,    March   14,  I960
Un-American   Staff   Director  Arens  Also  Paid   Consultant  on  Weird  Genetics  Projects
Walter,  Eastland  and  Arens  Linked   With  Multi-Millionaire    Racist  Angel
Richard   A tens,   staff   director   of   the   Un-American  Activi-
ties  Committee   (salary   1959:   $16,409.86),   also  serves  as  a
privately  paid  consultant  to  a  multi-millionaire New  Yorker,
Wycliffe   Draper,   in   allocating  grants  to   researchers   in   the
field  of  genetics.    Draper's  interest,  according  to  an  exclusive
story  by  Ronald   H.   May,  Washington   correspondent  of   the
York,  Pa.,  Gazette  and  Daily  and  the  Madison,  Wis.,  Capital-
Times,  is  in  proving  Negro  inferiority.     "As   far  as  I  could
tell,"   Sheldon   Reed,   director   of   the   Dwight   Institute  of
Human  Genetics  at  the  University of  Minnesota,  told  May  of
his  contacts  with  Draper,   "he  thought  the  country  would  be
better  off  without  Negroes"  and  was  interested   in  resettling
them   in  Africa.
"In   an   interview   several   weeks   ago,"    May  wrote   in   the
March  4  issue  of   the  York   Gazette   and  Daily.   "Arens   ad-
mitted  that  he  serves  as  a  Draper  consultant.    The  staff  direc-
tor  sees  nothing wrong  with  his  activity but  refused  to describe
the  research  projects.  His  role  is only  to  'recommend'  projects,
subject  to  later  approval  by a  committee.    He  would  not  name
the  persons  who  compose   it."
Both  Chairman  Walter  of  the  House  Committee  and  Chair-
man  Eastland  of  the  Senate  Internal  Security  committee  were
linked  to  Draper  by the  May  story.    The  former  told  May  he
had  himself   recently  visited  the  University  of  Dakar  in  West
Africa  in  connection  with  a  project  he  wants  Draper  to finance
—"a  plan   for   the   improvement   of   African   universities  to
promote  stability   in  native  governments."     [Perhaps  also  by
establishing    Un-African   Activities   Committees?—IFS.]
Draper  refused   to  talk  with  May  and  referred  him  to  his
lawyer,  Harry  Wehyer.    Wehyer  indicated  that  two  commit-
tee's  make  awards  of  Draper  funds,  that  Arens  only  serves  as
paid   consultant   to  one  of   them,   and   that   Senator  Eastland
was  connected  with  "the  other  one."     Wehyer  said Chairman
Walter  was  also  "involved"   in  the  giving  of  Draper   grants
but  would  not  disclose  the  membership  of  the  committees.
"Newsmen  first  heard   of   Draper   last   year,"   May  wrote,
"when   Dr.   Anthony   Bouscaren   resigned   a   political  science
professorship  at  Marquette  University  in  Milwaukee in  a  dis-
Academic  Freedom  Finds  New   Defender
"In  the  middle  of  a  scholarly  sociology  lecture  at  the
University  of  Colorado,  up  jumped  the  most  conspicu-
ous   member  of   the   class,   statuesque,  blonde  Marilyn
Van   Derbur,   22,  Miss  America  of   1958,  to   challenge
Associate  Professor   Howard  Higman.   Would  he  com-
ment   on  J.  Edgar   Hoover's  Masters  of  Deceit?    The
professor  obliged   by  launching   into  a  denunciation   of
the  FBI,  and  for  two  days  embattled  factions  of   the
190-student   class,   led   by   Marilyn   and   the    professor,
argued  the  reputation  of   the  FBI.   Proving  Marilyn's
point   that   the   FBI   is   always   on   the   spot,   Author
Hoover  sent  Marilyn  an  autographed  copy  of   Masters
of  Deceit  with  the  message:   'Your  actions  in  confront-
ing  error  with  truth  are  in  keeping  with  the   highest
traditions  of  academic  freedom.' "
—Time  Magazine,   March  7.
pute  with  university  authorities  over  his  acceptance  of  Draper
grants.     In  a  foreword  to  a   1959   book,  Bouscaren   thanked
Arens   for   assistance.     Arens   and   Bouscaren   have   appeared
together   on  programs   of  the  Christian  Anti-Communist  cru-
sade  and  similar  right  wing  groups.     The   staff   director   said
he  hired  Bouscaren  as a  consultant  to  the  Un-American  Activi-
ties   Committee.
Arens  Also  Advised  McCarthy Backer  H.  L. Hunt
Arens  told  May  that  Draper  also  gives  money  to  "patriotic"
organizations  fighting  Communism.    Draper,  heir  to  a  Massa-
chusetts  textile  machinery fortune,  "was  first  introduced  to  the
political  scene"  by  the  late  Senator  Pat  McCarran  of  Nevada.
Arens  said  that  he  has  also  advised  other  wealthy men,  includ-
ing  H.  L.  Hunt,  the  Texas  oilman  who  backed  McCarthy,  and
Smith  Richardson,  the  North  Carolina  pharmaceutical  manu-
facturer,  on  the  grant  of  funds  to  patriotic organizations.
"The   committee  director,"   May  reported  of   his  interview
with   Arens,  "does   not   intend  to   investigate   racist   or   hate
groups   because  they  are  isolated  and  unimportant."
IFS  Speaks   on  "First  Amendment  and  Academic  Freedom",  Columbia  Univ.,  Friday,  March  18,  8    P.M.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name     ........................................................—.——•—.••.—..........
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................ Zone............State....................
*                                                                                     3/14/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
(To)    Name   „..........;....................«.........................-.................
Street   ........................................................................................
City ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I    F    Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub
llshed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  16,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published    and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:
$5  In  the  D.  S.:  $6  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    .Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED