I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jan25.pdf

============================================================

To  Save  the Nuclear   Test  Talks,  P.  3
Justice  Dept.  Prepares  to  Put  Window  Dressing   on  the  Faceless  Informer  System,  Page  2
/. F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  3
JANUARY   25,  1960
'»'       WASHINGTON.  D.  C.
15  CENTS
That "Germany"  of Our Own  Below the Mason-Dixon Line
I  think  we  had   better  stop  worrying  so  much   about   the
Germans  and   start  worrying  about  ourselves.    The   lack  of
moral   indignation   about   the    failure   of    a   Biloxi   Federal
Grand  Jury  to  indict  anyone  in  the  Poplarville,  Miss.,  lynch-
ing   is  appalling.    We   have  come  to  take  the  racism  of   the
South  entirely  too  much  for  granted,  even  when   it  assumes
the   form   of   letting  mob   murder  go  unpunished  and   even
when  connived  in  by  State  officials  sworn  to  uphold  the  law.
If   I  were  a  Negro  I  would  feel   very  bitter  about  the  ability
of  our  press  and  public  to  spring  to  arms  at  the  mere  sugges-
tion  of  racism  in  Germany while remaining indifferent  to  the
full   blown   variety  in  our  own   South.
If  A  Jew  Had  Been  Lynched  in  the  Reich
Let   me   transpose  the   facts   to  bring  them   home   to   our
blunted  sensibilities.   Let  us  suppose  that  a  Jew  were lynched
by  a  mob  in  Germany,  that  the  Federal   secret  police  investi-
gated  and  identified  the  lynchers,  that  the  secret  police  found
that  Stale  officials  had  connived  in  the  lynching.    Lei  us  sup-
pose  that  first  a  State  grand   jury  and  then   a  Federal   grand
jury   refused   to   indict,   that   the   former   was   applauded   by
local   officials   for   refusing   even   to   look   at  the  secret  police
report  and  that  the  latter  also  declined to  act.    Let  us  suppose
that  a  juror  revealed   (as  one  juror  did  to  Stan  Opotowsky  in
the  New   York   Post,  Jan.   15)   that  few  of  the  32  witnesses
were  willing  to  talk,  some  of  them  in  fear  of  reprisals  from
racists  in  their  home   community.    Let  us  suppose   that   the
chief  of  the  secret  police  chose  this  moment,  not  to  denounce
racism  and  the  miscarriage of  justice,  but  to  join  hands  with
a   leading   racist   in   the   Bundestag   in   issuing   a    hysterical
report  about  the  danger  of  Communism.    It  is  easy  to  imagine
what   our   press   would   be  saying  about   such   a   Germany.
Anti-Semitism  Not  The  Only  Dangerous  Racism
It  is  true  that  we  and  the  rest  of  the  world  are  sensitive
to  anti-Semitism  in  the   Reich  because   its  use  as  a  political
tool  before  has  cost  the  world   dearly.    But  Germany  is  not
the  only  place  nor   is  anti-Semitism  the  only  form   in  which
racism   can   be   exploited   for   sinister   purposes.      Anti-Fascist
German   novelists   before   the   war,   writers   like   Remarque,
Ernst   Glaeser   and   Heinrich   Mann,   portrayed   a   pre-Hitler
Reich  with  features  familiar  in  our  own  South—small   town
communities  run  by  racist  bullies  in  which  good  citizens  were
afraid  to  speak   out,  a  youth  innured  to  brutality,  an  attitude
which   regarded  another  race  as  subhuman  and  thereby  pre-
pared  the  public  mind  to  accept  slave  labor  and  such  horrors
as  the  crematorium.    There  is  a  "Germany"   uncomfortably
close  at  hand,  a  danger  to  democracy  in  our  own   country.
Perhaps  because    it   is  so  close  at  hand,   we  are  afraid   to
look  at  it  closely.    When  the  news  from  Biloxi  came  over  the
news   ticker   on  Thursday   afternoon,  Senator   Javits  of   New
York   was  one  of  the  few  members  of   Congress   to  put  out
a  comment.    He  called  for  passage  of  an  anti-lynch  bill.   This
seemed   under   the  circumstances  almost   inane.     If   Southern
juries   cannot   be   trusted   to   indict   under   one   Federal   law,
what's  the  good  of  passing  another?    Congress  did  not  meet
again  until  Monday,  and   Monday   the   whole   affair   seemed
to  be  forgotten.    There  was  no  rush  to  sign  the  civil  rights
discharge   petition   in   the   House   in   order   to    demonstrate
indignation;  the  campaign  for  the  discharge  petition   was  -still
lagging.    No  one  in  either  House—not  even  the  three  Negro
members   of   Congress—rose  to   speak   on   the   subject.     The
only   "extension   of   remarks"   which   dealt   with   it   was   by
Mr.  Colmer  of  Mississippi  who  put  in  an  editorial   picturing
Poplarville  as  "a  town  with  a  culture,  staging   annual  flower
shows,   musicales,   religious  meetings,   band   concerts,   athletic
events  and  other  things  that  contribute  to  the  inner   man."
J.  Edgar  Mum  As  Usual  on  Lynching
In  the  Senate.  Bridges  of  New   Hampshire  put   into  the
record  a  report  J.  Edgar  Hoover  had  made  that  week-end  to
the  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee.   It  did  not,  of  course,
deal  with  the  dangers  of   racial  lawlessness  in  the  South.     It
dealt   with   the   17th   annual   convention  of   the   Communist
Party,  USA,  a  dwindling  sect  of  elderly  sectarians  only  Mr.
Hoover   takes   seriously   as  a   menace.     "Mr.   Hoover,"   said
Senator  Eastland  in  releasing  the  report,  "sees  danger   signals
in   recent   developments,   and   in   this  statement   he   has   put
America  on  notice."     It  turned  out  that  the  recent   develop-
ment  which  most  alarmed  Mr.  Hoover  was  the  visit  of   Pre-
mier  Khrushchov.     Are   an   Eastland  and   a   Hoover   in   our
government   any   less   noxious   than   an   Oberlaender   and   a
Schroeder  in  Adenauer's?    The  blindly  beneficent  eye  toward
racism,  the  monomania  about  communism,  are  the   same  on
both  sides.
Worse  Than  The  Missile Gap
No  one  would  dare  to think  this  in  Congress.   No  one  even
deplored  the  inability to  punish  lynchers.    Except  for  the  New
York  Post,  no  newspaper  was  interested  in  digging  below  the
surface  of  the  news  from  Biloxi.    The  day's  speeches  in  Con-
gress  were  largely  devoted   to  the  missile  gap.     It  looks  as  if
this  will  be  the  main  issue  in  the  coming  presidential   elections
—whether  we  or  the  Russians  have  the  bigger  missiles.    Even
writers  so  august  as  Walter  Lippmann  seem  to  be  hinting  that
our  prestige  in  the  eyes  of  the  rest  of  mankind  depends  on
•whether  we  have  the   "moral  fibre"  to   sacrifice  luxuries   in
order  to  build   more   destructive   weapons.    No   one  rises  to
suggest  that  the  rest  of  the  world  may judge  us  by other  gaps,
like  the  gap  between  our  preachment   about  freedom  and  our
acquiescence  in  racist  mob- violence.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  25, 1960
Leak  to  the  New  York  Times  Tests  "New"   Industrial  Security   Program
Justice  Dept. Puts  Some  Window  Dressing  on  the  Faceless  Informer  System
The  Department   of  Justice   seems  to  have  used   the   New
York   Times  last  Monday  Jan.  16  to  leak  an  advance  story  on
a  new  industrial  security  program.    Perhaps  the  motive  was
to  test  public  reaction.    The  headline  and  the  lead  were  de-
ceptively   optimistic.    The   former   said   workers   in   defense
plants  were  to  get  new  rights  and  the  latter  said  the  new  pro-
gram   would   make   "significant  concessions  to   the   principle
that  suspects  should  be  able  to  confront  their   accusers."
The  concessions,  when  the  story  got  down  to  the  details,
did  not  seem  very  significant.   At  present  in  security-loyalty
proceedings,   accused   persons   are   allowed   to   confront   and
cross-examine  any  accuser  who  cares  to  appear  against  them.
But  the  accused  has  no  right  to  cross-examine  either  the  pro-
fessional   informers  or  the   "casual   informants"  of   the   FBI
and  other  investigative  agencies.
The  Same  Exceptions  As  Before
Under  this  new  program,  the  right  of  confrontation  would
be  subject  to  two  exceptions  (1)  professional  informants  of
the kind  the  FBI  has  planted  in  radical  organizations and   (2)
casual   informants.    The   only  difference   would   lie  in  some
window-dressing   requiring   certification   that   the   casual   in-
formant  could  not  appear  because  of  "death,  severe  illness  or
some  other  good  and  sufficient  cause."  The  good  and   sufficient
cause  always  cited  by  the  FBI  is  that  people  would  not  talk
freely  about  friends  and  neighbors  unless  assured  that   their
identities  would  be  kept  confidential.
Some   such   window   dressing   is  required   because  the   Su-
preme  Court  last  June  in  the' Greene  case  refused   to  permit
faceless  informer  procedures  in  security  screening  for  indus-
trial  employment   (see  box  below).    The  Court  ruled  8-to-l
that   such  procedures   could   not   be  used   in   the   absence   of
specific  authorization  by  statute  or  executive  order.     A  ma-
jority  of  five,  speaking  through   the  Chief   Justice,  indicated
fundamental  hostility  to  such  procedures  even  if  so  authorized.
Three  other  Justices,  Harlan,  Frankfurter  and  Whittaker  de-
clined  to  pass  on  the  issue  in  advance.
The  Justice  Department   is  caught  between  a  hostile   court
and  an  FBI  hostile  to  the  disclosure  of  its  informants.    The
result  seems  to  be  an  executive  order  which  (it  is hoped)  can
be  sold   the  Court  and  public  opinion   as  a  reform   without
making  any  real   change  in  the  existing   system.    The   New
The  Danger   of  A  "Big   Brother"   System
"Furthermore,   in  considering   the   public   interest   in
the  preservation   of  a  system  under  which   unidentified
informers    are   encouraged   to   make   unchallengeable
statements   about   their   neighbors,   it   is  not  amiss   to
bear  in  mind  whether   or  not  we  must   look  forward   to
a   day   when   substantially    everyone  will   have   to   con-
template   the  possibility   that   his   neighbors   are  being
encouraged  to  make  reports  to  the  FBI  about   what  he
says,   what   he   reads   and   what   meetings   he   attends
.  .  .  The  time  has  not  come  when  we  have  to  abandon
a  system  of   liberty   for  one   modelled   on  that   of   the
Communists."
—Judge   Pope,   U.S.   Court  of  Appeals,   9th   Circuit,
Oct.    Si;,   1955,   holding   unconstitutional   the    faceless
informer    hearings   of   the  Magnuson   Act,   establishing
screening   procedures  for   the  merchant  marine.    This
decision,  the   first   to  uphold   the  right  of   confrontation
in  security   cases,  was  never  appealed    to  the  Supreme
Court   by   the   government   perhaps   because   it    feared
an  adverse   decision.
York   Times   itself  in  an  editorial  next  day  expressed  misgiv-
ings  about  the  generous  loopholes  in  the  new  program   and
said  the  real  question  is  "which  is  the  more  important  to  our
security:  the  eternal  rights  and  liberties  that  characterize  a  free
country  or  the  convenience  of  a  few  transient  officials."
We  hope  this  leak  will  stir  counterpressure.    An  investiga-
tion  of  the  faceless  informer  system  by  Congress  is  long  over-
due.   This  is  a  job  Senator  Hennings  and  his  Constitutional
Rights  subcommittee  ought  to  take  on.   Some  committee  ought
to  make  available  a  study  of  (1)   the  court  and administrative
cases  which  have  shown   how  many  of   the   professional   in-
formants  of  the  FBI  turned  out  to  be  perjurers  and  psycho-
paths  and  (2)   the  large  volume  of  evidence  which  indicates
how  often  the  system  of  promising  anonymity to  friends  and
neighbors  encourages  irresponsible gossip  and  loose  accusation.
A  related  question  is  equally  important.   Is  it  necessary  to
industrial   security  to   collect   rubbish—anonymous   or   docu-
mented—on   whether   a   job   applicant   patronizes   a   liberal
bookshop,   subscribes  to  a  good   music  station  or  belongs  to
some  Left-liberal  organization?   Isn't  it  time  we  got  back  to
punishing  people   for  unlawful  acts  rather  than  blacklisting
them  for  opinions  and  associations?
What  Chief  Justice  Warren  Said  Last  Year  of  the  Right  to  Face   Accusers
"Certain   principles   have  remained  relatively   immutable
in  our  jurisprudence.    One  of  these  is  that  where  govern-
mental  action .seriously  injures  an  individual,  and  the  rea-
sonableness  of  the  action  depends  on  fact  findings,  the  evi-
dence  used  to  prove  the  Government's  case  must  be  disclosed
to  the   individual   so  that  he  has  an  opportunity  to  show
that  it  is  untrue.
"While   this   is   important   in   the   case   of   documentary
evidence,  it  is  even  more  important  where  the  evidence  con-
sists  of  the  testimony  of  individuals   whose  memory  might
be  faulty   or  who,   in  fact,  might  be  perjurers  or  persons
motivated  by  malice,   vindictiveness,   intolerance,   prejudice
or  jealousy.    We  have  formalized   these  protections  in  the
requirements  of  confrontation  and cross-examination.   They
have   ancient   roots.     They   find   expression   in   the   Sixth
—Chief   Justice  Warren,  in
Amendment    which   provides  that  in  all  criminal   cases   the
accused  shall   enjoy   the  right   'to  be  confronted   with   the
witnesses  against  him.'
"This   Court   has   been   zealous   to   protect   these   rights
from  erosion.    It  has  spoken  out  not  only  in  criminal  cases
but   also   in   all   types  of   cases   where   administrative  and
regulatory  action  were  under  scrutiny  . ..  Under  the present
clearance  procedures  not  only  is  the  testimony   of   absent
witnesses  allowed   to  stand  without   the  probing  questions
of  the  person  under   attack   which  often   uncover   inconsist-
encies,  lapses  of  recollection  and  bias,  but  in  addition  even
the  members  of   the   clearance  boards  do  not  see   the   in-
formants  or  know  their  identities,  but  normally  rely  on  an
investigator's  summary   report   of  what   the  informant   saiJ
without  even  examining  the   investigator  psrsonally."
Greene v, MeElroy,  June  29,  1959,  decided  8-to-l.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone’s Weekly, January 25, i960 
-3 
Dzfense and AEC Energetic - Against  Agreement; State Dept.  For But Lackadaisical 
Four Places to Prod For Action 
Some points at which readers might press to help prevent a 
breakdown in the nuclear  test negotiations: 
1. The Deniocrn’rc Advisory Council. On Dec. 5 it issued 
a statement  advocating 
a “National Peace  Agency”, authorized 
among other things, to direct  studies  in  improved methods of 
nuclear de:ection. The failure of the  Defense Department to 
implement the Berkner   Panel recommendations   last March 
for a  3-year program in seismology  dramatically illustrates the 
need for such  a  “peace agency.” Why is the  Democratic Ad- 
visory  Council silent?    Why doesn’t it point to  the foot- 
dragging at Defense? 
Speed Only on Projnct for Obstruction 
2. Sena:or Clinion P. Anderson, chairman of the Joint 
Congressional  Committee on Atomic  Energy.    Last June 
25, 
according to material  jast  obtained by the Weekly from  the 
Joint Committee,   Senator   Anderson   wrote the President’s 
Science Assistant, Dr. Killian, stressing the urgency of im- 
plementing the Berkner  Panel  recommendations and offering 
his help  “in  the event  additional  appropriations by the Con- 
gress 
IS required.” Copies were  sent by the  Senator to the 
Secretaries of State and Defense, and  to the Chairman of the 
AEC. The rather inconclusive  replies from 
Dr. Killian  are 
interesting  in one respect.    At the time he wrote, the Berkner 
recommendations had been available  within the Administra- 
tion for more  than three months 
brit /he only specific iesearrh 
projert 
which Dr. Krllian codd rife as actridly mderuay was 
/he testing by non-nzicleai high exploshes underground of 
Teller’s “deep hole” mifling lheory. Senator   Anderson 
could  accomplish a great desl if he followed through on these 
letters and demanded 
3 full accounting. Unfortunately he 
seems to have been won over in the interim to 
a resumption 
of testing. 
3. 
Senaioi Hrlbert H. Himphrey. As chairman of the Sen- 
ate  disarmament subcommittee, he could force action on the 
Berkner  Panel recommendations 
by public hearings to find out 
to Save the Nuclear Test Talks 
Britons Here for “Big Hole” Tesfs 
- 
A delegation of British   scientists has arrived  in 
this country for joint tests i:i the Carey Co. salt mines 
near Winnfield, La., designed to demonstrate the 
prac- 
ticality of the Teller theory that nuclear tests can be 
“muffled”  in large underground chambers. The AEC 
“gave out” the news after inquiries from  the London 
News   Chroiiicle but did 
so only by reading an an- 
nouncement to Reuter‘s and  the American 
wire serv- 
ices. No press release was sent out to the AEC’s usual 
list. The  result was a  minimum of publicity, 
what  has happened to them,  particularly to that portion of the 
recommendations  which  called for the setting up of 
a pilot 
model to test the Geneva inspxtion system. 
In a  little noticed Senate speech 
Jan. 
11 Senator  Church (D. Idaho) made  public a letter he 
had  sent Secretary Herter suggesting joint East-West research 
in improving nuclear  detection. The speech called attention 
to the “package”  proposal put  forward by the Russians 
Dec. 
14 which agreed to accept the Western  formula for the man- 
ning of inspection posts (one-third  West,  one-third Soviet, 
one-third neutral) if we would accept their  plan for the con- 
trol commission (3 Western, 3 Soviet and 1 neutral). The 
State Department 
has yet to formulate its  reply to this com- 
promise  offer and  to  the Macmillan-Khrushchov  proposal for 
a  quota of veto free inspections. According to the 
London 
Tunes (Jan. 16) from Geneva, Mr. Tsarapkin said that if 
agreement could be reached on a  quota,  it  would be easy to 
agree on  the criteria for determining what was 
a “suspicious 
event” eligible to inspection. Sir  Michael Wright suggested 
provisional criteria be agreed  upon pending further re;earch 
in the means  of detection. When is State Dept.  going  to 
make up its mind  about  these fruitful possibilities 
€or com- 
promise?   Defense and AEC,  which don’t want an agreement, 
are being  energetic in developing obstacles; State, which, is 
supposed to be for 
an agreement, is half-hearted. 
4. The State Department. 
Manchester Guardian Science Editor 
The  President at AtIgusta   accused  Soviet scientists at 
Geneva of refusing  to consider data presented by 
our side 
on the Hardtack  series of underground nuclear  explosions 
and of using technically unsupportable  arguments.    A dif- 
fere!:t view was   expressed by the science editor of the 
Manchester Guardian in a  half page  study of the technical 
issues Jan. 
5 which has   just become available in this 
country. We give a key  seetion here: 
“The  Russian reply to these  nssertions [that  the Hard- 
tack results showed it would be  much more difficult than 
had earlier been  believed to distinguish underground nuclear 
blasts from earthquakes-IFS] at the meetkgs of Working 
Group 
I1 has been virulent and-so far as it is possible to 
judge   from the information   available from American 
sources-at least partly justified. 
“Some 
of the detailed and  apparently valid criticism 
made by the  Russians at Geneva are that the seismometers 
i!sd were not adjusted for sensitivity in the recommended 
freqirency range, that at 
28 of the statio:?s the seismometers 
were  not  calibrated, and that arrays of ten seismometers 
working together were not installed at any of the stations 
(at two stations arrays of four were used). 
“Another  serious criticism was of the American attempt 
to  infer  the relationship between the seismic signals and 
Slipports Soviet Critique of U.S. Data 
the size of the explosion from data which  included measnre- 
ments made within the shadow zone. This procedure, which 
is not good seismological  practice, would have underesti- 
mated the ease with which explosions could be detectei 
and the Russians,   working more  correctly  with the  raw 
American data, were able to calculate that   the seismic 
magnitude of the B1a:ica shot (one of the Hardtack  series 
[the biggest in fact] and  equivalent to 
17 kilotons) was 
such that any revision of the 
1958 experts’ report should 
be in an optimistic direction.” 
This  reference to “optimistic direction” becomes clear if 
one examines  some  figures on the number of earthquakes 
to be expected i:: the range of small kiloton  shots. The 
experts conference at Geneva  in 
1958 had  estimated 10,000 
a year in the  range of one kiloton. On Jan. 5, 1959, our 
experts claimed the new Hardtack  series of tests showed 
that this estimate should be increased 
to 26000, thus 
enormously increasing the difficulties of distinguishing 
underground shots from  earthquakes. At  the new tech- 
nical  conference last month, the 
U.S. revised this downward 
to 15,000, but admitted that the real number might vary 
from 7,500 to 30,000. The  Russians  insisted that our new 
data, properly evaluated, would give a:> estimate of only 
3,000 earthquakes in that range.-IFS. 
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  25, I960
Kennedy,  Like  Ike, Brave  on  McCarthy  But  Only  Post  Mortem
That  "New"  Japan  Is  About  As  New  As  That  "New"  Germany
No  statesman  ever  spoke  more  rashly  than  Mr.  Eisenhower
in  his  reference  to  the  new  Japanese  treaty  as  an   "indestruc-
tible  partnership";  the  new  treaty  is distinguished by the  num-
ber  of  trouble-breeding  questions  it  leaves  unsettled;   the  new
Japan,  by  the  extent  to  which  it  resembles  the  one  we  had  to
fight.    The  big  monopolistic   family  combines  are  back;  so  are
the  notorious   thought   police.     An   interesting   concession  to
Japanese  public  opinion  in  the  final  communique  was  the  ex-
pressed   hope  "for an  early  agreement"   on  cessation   of   nu-
clear  tests. ...  At  the  other  end of  the  old  Berlin-Tokyo  axis,
we  note  that  while  West  Germany  is  blaming  neo-Nazi out-
breaks   on   East   German   plotters,   the   East   German   regime
{London  Times, Jan. 14)  is blaming  its  outbreak  of  swastika-
daubing  on  plotters  from  Bonn.
On  The  "Delicate  Subject"  of  Germ  Warfare
At  his  press  conference  Jan. 13,  Mr.  Eisenhower  said  "so
far   as  my  own   instinct  is  concerned"   he   would   be  against
using  gas  or  germ  warfare  unless  first  utilized   Jby  an  enemy.
But  on  Dec. 31,  in  reply  to  a  letter  from  Congressman  Kas-
tenmeier   (D.   IF/.r.),  the  President  said  cryptically  that   the
Defense  Department  was  "reviewing  the  status  of  this  mat-
ter."     Mr.  Kastenmeier  asked  for  reaffirmation  of  long-stand-
ing  policy  pledging  the  U.S. not  to  use  CBR  [chemical,  bac-
teriological  or  radiological]    warfare   first.   Mr.   Kastenmeier
has  introduced  H.  Con.  Res.  433  to  have  Congress  affirm  this.
Secretary  of   Defense   Gates   in  his  appearance  before   House
Appropriations  on  the  new  1961 Defense   budget  admitted
that  emphasis  on  CBR  is  being  increased  but   specific  infor-
mation  was  classified   on  the  ground   that—as~~Mr  Gates  ex-
plained—"it  is  a  very  delicate  subject."
Struggle  over  McCarthy  Too "Intense"  for  Kennedy
While  Senator  Kennedy  was telling  the National  Press  Club
what  a  big, bold  President  we  need  (and he  would   make),
his  biographer,  James  MacGregor  Burns,  was  explaining  why
he  failed  to  take  a  position  on  McCarthy.   "The intensity of
the  struggle  offended  him,"  Prof  Burns writes  tactfully.    "He
was  consistent  in   his   non-commitment."    A   story  by   Peter
Edson  in  the  Scripps-Howard  press  (Jan. 5)   told  how  Ken-
Eden's   Portrait   of   Walter   S.   Robertson
"Meanwhile  Mr.  Robertson   [then  Assistant  Secretary
of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs,   more  recently  head
of  the  U.S. delegation  to  the  UN   General   Assembly],
whose  approach   to  these  questions  is  so  emotional  as
to  be  impervious   to  argument,  was  keeping   up  a  sort
of  'theme  song'  to  the  effect  that  there  were  in  Indo-
china   some   300,000   men   who   were   anxious   to   fight
against  the  Vietminh   and  were  looking  to  us  for sup-
port  and  encouragement.    I  said  that  if   they  were  so
anxious  to  fight  I  could   not  understand   why  they  did
not  do  so.    The  Americans   had  put  in  nine  times  more
supplies  of  material   than  the  Chinese,  and  plenty  must
be  available  for  their  use."
—Sir  Anthony  Eden's  memoirs  of  the  1954  crisis  in
Indochina,  The, Times  (London)   Jan.  12.
nedy's  father "hit the  ceiling"  when  his  son  was  asked  to  sign
an  anti-McCarthy advertisement with  a  group  of  Notre  Dame
professors  in  1953,  and  drove  the  sponsor  of  that  idea,  Gard-
ner  Jackson,  out  of  the  Kennedy  home  with  an  anti-Semitic
tirade.   Mr.  Edson  says  the  Senator  was  preparing  to  vote  for
censure  in  1954  when  he  was  hospitalized.   Gardner  Jackson
in  a  letter  of  protest  published by  the  Washington  Daily  News
Jan.   13  says  Kennedy  wasn't  too  sick  to  let  his  position  be
known.   While   in  the  hospital  Kennedy  wrote  his  "Profiles
of  Courage",  other  people's  courage,  that  is.
Now  That  McCarthy's  Safely  Dead
Senator  Kennedy  is  very  much  like  Mr.  Eisenhower.    Both
were  afraid   to  oppose   McCarthy  when  he  was  alive.     Now
that  he  is  dead  and  the  revolt  of  the  academic community  has
made  the  issue safe,  the  President  in  his  new  budget  message
joins  Kennedy  in  supporting  the  Kennedy-Clark  bill  to  repeal
that  provision  of  the  National  Defense  Education  scholarship
oath  which  requires  an  applicant  to  swear  he  does  not  belong
to  any  subversive  organization.    Passage   of   the   repealer   at
this  session  now  seems  assured.
Hat's   Off:    To  Otto  Preminger  for  defying  the   Hollywood
blacklist  and   announcing  he  has  hired  Dalton   Trumbo.
Please   Add   A   Gift   Sub   With   Your   Reneivals   to   Help    Us   Fight   Rising   Costs
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
1/25/flO
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name    ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  Q    No  D
/F. Stows  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   P.   Stuiie's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter  at   Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  187«.    Post-dated  Mondays  but pub-
lished  i-verv  Thursday  except   tin-  last  two  Thursdays  of  AugUit  and  December  at   5618 Nebraska   Ave..  N.  W..  Washington   15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
s.-.  in    Hi.-  r.   s.  :   Si
1
,   iii   Cnnnilii:  *10  elsewhere.     Air  Mall  rates  •  *in   Io  Riirarw:   S:'(>   (..   Isrn.-l    ,\«<n     .M.I     \fri.-n
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED