I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960nov14.pdf

============================================================

K. S. Karol  on Algeria, P. 2
Porter,  Meyer  and  Byron  Johnson  Defeated,  P.  4;  How  Belgium  Is  Taking  Over  Again  in  the  Congo,  P.  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VIII,  NO.  41NOVEMBER   14,  1960
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
No  Firm  Majority,  No  Clear  Mandate,  No  Real  Verdict
The  election  returns  seem  to  be  as  devoid  of  meaning  as
was  the  campaign.  They  cannot  be  hailed  as  a  triumph  over
religious  bigotry;  anti-Catholicism  swept  the   farm   areas  de-
spite  low  prices;  Kennedy  would  not  have  won  without   the
Catholic vote  in  the  Northeast.    Nobody  knew  just what  Ken-
nedy  stood  for,  but  whatever  it  was  the  margin  between  him
and  Nixon—one  third  of  one  percent,  as  this  was  written—is
too  small  to  constitute  a  mandate  for  doing  it.    It  had  been
hoped  Kennedy  might  win  without  the  South  and  that  this
election  would  weaken  the  one  party  system  there,  but  of  the
Southern  States  only  Virginia  and  Florida  went  for   Nixon;
Kennedy  would  not  have  won  otherwise.    The   Democratic
majorities  of  House  and  Senate  will  be  as  deceptive  as  ever
for  the  key committee posts  will  still  be  held  by Southern  con-
servatives  linked  in  their  old  oligarchic  coalition  with  the  Re-
publicans.    Unless  the  rules  are  changed.
No  Evident  Desire  for  Change
The  election  returns  show  no great  desire for  change,  and as
the  excitement of  our  great  quadrennial  sports  event  dies  down
it  appears  that  nothing  has changed.    But  appearances  may  be
deceptive.    The  actions  of  an  Administration often  bear  little
.esemblance  to  the  rallying  cries  on  which   it  had  won   the
election;  Elsenhower's  campaign  pledge  to  substitute  "libera-
tion"  for  containment  is  a  striking  recent  example.    Now  an
elderly  man  with  little  interest  in  his  job  is  to  be  replaced  in
the  White  House  by  an  energetic  young  man.    For  good  or
evil,  we  are  likely  to  have  leadership  instead  of  drift.     We
hope  our  misgivings  about  Kennedy  will  prove   unjustified.
The  prospect  opening  up  before  the  new  President   would
dismay  the  boldest  character.  He  faces  a  series  of  crises  with-
out  a hearty majority vote  to give him  moral  support,  and  with
the   levers   of   power   in   Congress   held   by  old   and   skilled
enemies of  social  reform at  home  and  new  international  initia-
tives  abroad.    A  recession  is  underway.    The   chronic  farm
problem  is  worse  than  ever.    The  gold  outflow  has  reached
proportions  where  serious  thought  is  called  for.    New   crises
are  brewing  over  Berlin  and  Algeria;  there  will  have  to  be  a
new  summit;  nuclear  testing   and  disarmament   call  for  new
initiatives.     Slow   fuses   are  burning  in  Africa,   in   Southeast
Asia,  on  the  Formosa  straits  and  in  Central  America,   above
all  in  Cuba,  on  which  Kennedy  spoke  so  foolishly  in  the  cam-
paign.  New  flareups  are  likely  in  the  South  over   integration.
The  first  indication  of  where  Kennedy  intends  to  go  will  be
evident  of  course  in  his  Cabinet  choices,  particularly  for  Secre-
tary  of  State;  will  it  be  a  conventional   stuffed  shirt  like  David
Bruce  or  a  man  of  vision  and  capacity  like  Adlai  Stevenson?
But  the first test  of  the new President  will  come with  the  open-
ing  of  Congress.    Will  he  choose  to  appease   the   Southern
1   1 *                                                                                                      1
On  That  'Death  Ray'  Bomb
"Four   of   the   nation's  top  scientists   strongly   disa-
greed   yesterday   with   the   statement   by   Thomas   E.
Murray,   former   AEC   Commissioner,   that   the   U.S.
should  resume  underground  nuclear  tests  to  get  ahead
of  the  Soviet  Union in  the  development  of  the  so-called
neutron  or  death-ray  bomb.  .  .  .
"Dr.   Hans  A.  Bethe,  professor  of  physics  at  Cornell
.   .  .  said  'This  is   another  attempt  to   divert  public
opinion  from  the  real  issue  to  get  a  treaty  that  could
lead  to -disarmament. ...  It  is  questionable  that  the
bomb  could  be  developed  and  I  don't  see  that  it  would
have  a  great  advantage over  the  old-fashioned  fission
bomb,   of   which   we   have  thousands.'
"Dr.    Isidor  I.  Rabi,  Nobel  prize  winner  in   physics,
member  of  the  President's  Science  Advisory Committee
said:   'Mr.   Murray   doesn't   know   very   much   about
atomic  physics  and  is  not  technically  qualified.   .  .  .'
Dr.  Rabi  said  the  public  was  being  misled  on  the  test
question  because  of  secrecy,  which  also  prevented  him
'from  discussing  these  questions  freely.  .  .  .'
" 'Irresponsible'  was   what  Dr.  Jerome  B.  Wiesner
[MIT   professor  and  Kennedy  adviser]  called  Mr. Mur-
ray's  statement. ...  'I  know  of  no reason  for  resuming
testing  immediately.    My  own  view  is   that  the   U.S.
cannot   let   any  single   thing  hinder  the   negotiations.
The  use  or  leak  of  'scare'  stories  inhibits  the  govern-
ment  in  such  talks,'  Dr.  Wiesner  said.  .  .  .
"Dr.    David  R.  Inglis,  former  chairman  of   the  Fed-
eration  of  American  Scientists  and  senior  physicist  at
the  AEC's  Argonne  National  Laboratory  said  Mr. Mur-
ray's   description  of   the   neutron  bomb  was   "fantas-
tically  exaggerated.'    The  bomb,  he  said,  was  a  'scal-
ing   down  of  the  A-bomb  to  a  low  efficiency   to  make-
it  give  out  more  neutron  (short  lived  particles)  radia-
tion  than  blast  damage.'"
—New   York   Herald-Tribune,  Nov.  5.
This  is  the  same  death  ray  bomb  scare  story  used
by  Dodd  in  his  Senate  speech  for  resumption  of  testing
last  May  12.
leadership,  or  use  the  patronage  and  prestige  of  a  new  Presi-
dency  to  reform  the  rules  so  that  majority  decision  and  firm
executive  leadership  are  again  possible?   All  else  will  depend
on  how  Kennedy  answers  this  question.
We  believe  it  the  duty  of  the  liberals  in  the   Democratic
party  not  to  wait.    A  program   for  reform  of  the  rules  is  a
first  essential   if  platform   pledges  are  to  be  kept;  we  again
propose  for  December  a National  Conference  To  End  Minor-
ity  Rule  of  Congress.   A  program  on  peace  and   disarmament
is   equally   urgent.     In   this   connection,   we  are   immensely
cheered   by  the  big  majority  which   reelected   Humphrey   in
Minnesota  and  look  to  him  for  the  kind  of  intra-party  leader-
ship   needed   if   a  liberal   Kennedy   Administration   is  to   be
made  possible.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  H, 1960
Algerian  Referendum  Under  UN  Control  Termed  Only  Hope  of  Peace
De  Gaulle's  New  Speech  On  Algeria  as  Seen  from  the  French  Left
By  K.  S.  Karol
General  de  Gaulle's  new  speech  on  Algeria  dissipated   the
last  illusions  of  his  one-time faithful  followers  who  believed
that  he  was  the  best,  if  not  the  only  French  political  leader
capable  of making peace in  Algeria.  While  everything  clearly
indicates that  Chinese and Russian  assistance to  the  Algerian
Government -in  Exile  is  leading  toward  military internation-
alization   of  the   six-year   old  Algerian   war,  the   President
of  the  French  Republic  spoke  as  if  he  had  time  on  his  side
and  could  afford  to  work patiently  for  an  intermediate  solu-
tion  ultimately  leading  to  an  autonomous Algeria   associated
with  France.    He  condemned  indignantly  the   two  "hostile
packs"   fighting   against   his   policy,  namely,  the   extreme-
right  champions  of  "Algerie  Francaise"  and  the   growing
left-wing   movement  advocating  the   negotiation   of  an   im-
mediate peace.   The latter, in his words, are  guilty  of preach-
ing  an  "outright  abandonment which  would  lead  France   to
catastrophe."
This skillfully  demagogic  description  is partly a  by-product
of   de   Gaulle's   meglomania—all   those   who  disagree   with
him  are  immediately bad  Frenchmen.   It  is  also  a  calculated
attempt   to  influence  American  and  Western  public  opinion.
"De  Gaulle,"  as  one  of  his  close  friends  defined  him,  "is  a
mixture  of  Jeanne  d'Arc  and  a  rug-merchant."   His  speech,
threatening   the  bogey  of  "Soviet  Algeria"  if  the  FLN  has
its  way,  and  promising  a  slow  evolution  toward   a   liberal
and  ultimately  independent  Algeria,  is  a  case  in  point.
The  Kind  of  Referendum They  Distrust
The   facts—which   the   major  American  papers   seem   to
overlook—speak,  nevertheless,  against  de Gaulle's  whole con-
ception;  and  if  there  is  a  real  danger  that  Algeria   might
fall  under  Soviet  influence  while  France  would  be  delivered
to  a  military  dictatorship,  it  arises  precisely  from  the  stub-
born  refusal  of  the  French  President  to  negotiate  now  with
Ferhat  Abbas  and  his  government.   Beautifully  worded  sen-
tences  can  no  longer  hide  the  truth.    When  de  Gaulle  says
that  the  French  Army  will  stop  in  Algeria   and  supervise
a  future  referendum  on  self-determination,  he  sets  a  con-
dition  which  only  a  defeated  country  in  an  act  of   despera-
tion   could  accept.    This  is  not,  however,  the   case   of   the
Algerian   Nationalists.     They  feel   stronger   today  than   at
any  time  since  the  beginning  of  the  war   and  they   didn't
endure  the  deaths  of  more than  500,000  of  their  countrymen
at  the  hands  of  the  French  Army  for  the  privilege  of  cast-
ing  a symbolic vote under a paratrooper's  supervision.  There-
fore,  all  the  promises   and  appeals  to  the  Nationalists  are
in  reality   camouflaged   calls  for   surrender,   and   de  Gaulle
must  know  that  Ferhat  Abbas  would  not  accept  them,  even
without  the  support  of  Mao-Tse-Tung  and  Khrushchov.
"I  have  two  problems  to  solve  simultaneously:  the  Army
problem  and  Algeria,"  said  de  Gaulle  to  one  of  his  ministers
on   the   eve   of   his   Friday   speech   (as   reported   by   Jean
Daniel  in  the  Tunisian  newspaper  Afrique-Action),  and  the
whole   philosophy  behind  his   actions   is   contained   in  this
sentence.    De  Gaulle  needs  peace  in  Algeria   and  is  aware
that  the   survival   of  his   regime   depends  largely   on  this
issue.    But  he  also  wants  to  avoid  a  show-down  with   the
army   which  put   him  in'power  in   1958  and  which  repre-
sents,  in  his  eyes,  a  unifying  force  for  the  nation.    Unfor-
tunately  for  him,  these  two  aims  are  self-contradictory.  The
part  of  the  French  Army  which  has  joined  sides  with  the
French   settlers  in  Algeria   will  not  give  up  their  virtual
control  of  that  country  unless  compelled to  do so by.massive
pressure  from  Metropolitan  France.    The  paratroop   officers
don't  mind  being  called  by  de  Gaulle  "a   pack   of  sterile
immobilists"  as  long  as  they  can  do  what  they  want  and
remain  certain  that  the  war  will  continue.    But  to  be  sure,
they  are  carefully  preparing  a  new  13  of  May  putsch  with
some  extremist  politician   as   Soustelle  or   Bidault,  just  in
case  de  Gaulle  makes  a  real  move toward  negotiations  with
K.  S.  Karol,  a  Polish  expatriate,  has  made  a  repu-
tation  in  France  by  his  brilliant  journalism  for   L'Ex-
press   and   the   London  New   Statesman,   arid   by   his
book  "Visa  au  Pologne."   He  is  now  covering  the  UN
and  we  asked  him  to  write  us  an  article  on  de  Gaulle's
latest  speech  on  Algeria.   Too  few   Americans  realize
how  quickly  we  could  be  drawn  into  war  over  Algeria
if   all  hope  of  peace  breaks  down  and  Sino-Soviet  "vol-
unteers"   make  their  appearance   in   the  rebel   forces.
Ferhat  Abbas.   But  they  do not  represent  a  very  significant
section  of  the  public  opinion.   Few,  even  among  the  right-
ists  in  France,  are  eager  for  a  Massu-Salan-Soustelle  re-
gime.    But  they   are   counting  on  the   division   within   the
ranks  of  their  enemies,  and  a  natural  fear  of  Civil  War.
By  placing  on  the  same  level  the  great  popular movement
for  honest  peace  negotiations  and  a  handful  of  extremists,
de  Gaulle  is  not  only  misleading  the  world  public  opinion,
but  is  isolating   himself  from  the  very  forces  which  could
protect  France  from  a  Fascist  attempt.
I  believe with  Jean-Paul  Sartre  that  the  fundamental  fac-
tors  involved  in  French  politics  are  now the  same  as  in  1958.
Part  of  the  army  wants  war,   while  France   wants   peace;
but  the  military  clique  threatens  a  putsch  if  it  doesn't  have
its  way,  and  no  one  dares  to  call  its   bluff.    I  say   bluff,
because  I  think  that  a  majority  of  the  officers  would  think
twice  before  undertaking  this  kind  of  action,  and  the  20,000
paratroopers,   (the  real  striking  force  of  the  extreme   fac-
tion)  are  not  enough  to  take  control  of  France.    And  iron-
ically   enough,  some  military   experts   claim  that   if   these
troops  (and  the  foreign  legion)  would  invade  Paris  in  order
to  keep  Algeria  French,  they   would  lose  the   very  object
of  the  battle,  for  the  Algerian  Nationalists  would have  little
trouble, in their  absence,  in  defeating  the  conscript  army.
De  Gaulle's  Sour  View  of  the  Army
De  Gaulle  himself  is  on  the  record  as  saying:  "The  Army
has  no  political   brain.    It   was  against   Dreyfus   and  for
Petain.    Each  of  its  interventions  was  a  mistake.    You  can
surround  the  Elysees   with  paratroopers,  but  what  then?"
But  he  is not  the  man to  force  a  showdown  with  this  "brain-
less"  force  and  he  doesn't  want  to  depend  on  the  popular
support  of  the  Left-Wing  forces.   He believes  that  time,  and
a  growing  formation  of  the   new  Moslem  pro-French   elite
will  automatically  lead  to  some  compromise  settlement.   He
admits  privately  that  he  counts  more  on the  next  generation
of  Algerians  than  the  present  one.
I  don't  think  that  the  climate  of  the  war,  with  tortures
and   concentration    camps,   is   propitious   for   the    growth
of   a  middle-of-the-road  elite.    But  even  were  I  to   accept
this  theory,  I  would  wonder  how  de  Gaulle  can  plan   gen-
erations   ahead  when  he  faces  a  new  phase  of  the  war  in
the  next  few  weeks.   The  Moroccans and  the  Tunisians  have
already  announced that  the  forthcoming  arrival  of  the  heavy
Chinese  and  Russian  armaments  will  completely  change  the
very  nature   of  the  present   struggle.    For  the   first   time
the  Algerians  will  have  the  means  to  break  the  Ligne  Morice
which   paralyzes   the   communications  between  their   forces
stationed   in  Tunisia   and  the   Maquis.    The  two   Maghreb
countries   are   apparently   not   afraid   of   French   retaliation
for  accepting  Chinese and  Russian  arms  on their  territory.
De  Gaulle  continues  to  ignore  the  fact  that  the   Algerian
war  is  politically   and  militarily  an  international   one.   The
Western  liberals  should  consider  that  the  only  way  to  avoid
disaster  for   both  France  and  the   West   is  to   accept   the
Algerian  proposal  of  a  free  referendum  under  U.N.  control.
This  is  precisely   what   "the   pack  of  agitators"  is  fighting
for  in  France,  led  by  the  best  forces  of  French   youth  and
French   intellectuals.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  14, I960
Will  We  Soon  Join  the  Russians  in  Asking  a  3-Man  Secretariat,  Too,  to  Veto  Mr.  H?
U.S.  Now  Supporting  Belgium  in  Undercutting  the  UN  in  the  Congo
Those  with  a  taste  for  cynical  flavors  will  enjoy  the  strik-
ing  resemblance  between  the  arguments  used  by  Mr.  Zorin
of  the   USSR  before  the   Security   Council  on  September  14
on  Russia's  right  to  give  the  Congo  aid  outside  the   frame-
work  of  the  UN  and  those  put  forward  by  Belgium   in  its
note  of  October  28  to  Secretary  General   Hammarskjold.
Hammarskjold  No  Longer  Our  Hero
Both  insisted  that  to  require  all  technical  aid  to  be  chan-
nelled  through   the  UN  would  be  an  interference   with   the
sovereign  rights  of  an  independent  state.    The  difference  is
that  the  Russians  were  giving  aid  to  the  lawfully   consti-
tuted   government  of  the   Congo  while   the   Belgians   have
been  supporting   various   groups   at  the   center  and  in  the
provinces  which   are  trying  to  prevent   reestablishment  of
the  parliamentary   regime.    The  Russian  and  Belgian  actions
were  alike,  however,  in  threatening  to  undercut   the   hope
of  insulating  the  Congo  from  the  cold  war.    The   important
difference   is  that   while   the   U.S.  made   a  hero  of   Ham-
marskjold  for  rebuffing  the  Russians,  our  State   Department
has   leaped   into   action   to   criticize  the   UN  command   for
trying  to  stop  the  Belgians.   Not  many  weeks  have  passed
since   Mr.  Eisenhower   announced   that   our   policy   was   to
support   the   UN,  but   like  other   powers   great   and   small
we  seem  to  like  the  UN  only  when  it  does  our  bidding.   If
Mr.  Hammarskjold   continues   to  demand  that  the   Belgians
cease  their  efforts   (see  box  below)  to  take  over  the  Congo
from  within,  we  shall  soon  be  joining  the  Russians   in  pro-
posing  a  3-headed  secretariat  so  we  can  have  a  veto  handy,
too,  over  Mr.  Hammarskjold.
That   Belgian   technicians   can  play   a  useful   role  in  the
Congo  is  admitted,  but  not  if  they  are  part  of  a  take-over
operation   outside   the   framework   of  the   UN.    The  State
Department  release  of  November  4  is  designed  to  hide  the
real  nature  of  Belgian   operations  in  the   Congo.    -Africans
and   Asians   will  assume   that  we  are   conniving
1
  with   the
Belgians.    The  Congo  needs  UN  tutelage  but  this  will  be
acceptable   to   the   Afro-Asians    only   if   the   UN   operates
through  and  with  a  parliamentary  regime,  and  not  through
a   military   dictatorship  stage-managed  by  the   West.   The
Dayal  report  criticizes  the  Belgians  for  inviting  Congolese
military   officers   to   Belgium   for  training;  if   the    Russians
That  Strong  Man  Army Regime
"Since   the  assumption  of  power  by  their  Chief  of
Staff  Mobuto  on  4  September,  these  undisciplined  ANC
Congolese  National  Army  troops,  lacking  any  coherent
control,  have  been  drawn  into  the  vortex  of   political
strife.    Their  lawless   actions  have  had  varying  and
sometimes   contradictory  political   motivations.   .   .   .
The  ANC  command  in   Leopoldville  denies  authoriza-
tion   for  many  of   the  acts   of   lawlessness  committed
by  ANC  personnel.     The  very   fact   of   the   denial   is
conclusive  evidence  of  the  complete absence  of  control.
Even  in  Leopoldville  itself,   the  ANC  troops   are  not
under  any  single  effective  command and  the  Chief  of
Staff   himself   has  sought   and  long   enjoyed  the  pro-
tection  of  UN  troops.  .  .  .  Par  from   the  ANC  pro-
viding  any  measure  of  security  or  stability,  it  became
the  principal  fomentor  of  lawlessness."
—Dayal   report   to  Hammarskjold,   Nov.   2.
did  this  there  would  be  an  outcry.    But  the   U.S.  is   open
to  the  same  criticism  for  bringing  here  11 Congolese   officers
from  the  army  of  Mobutu,  whom  we  had  hoped  to   convert
into  a   Congolese   Batista.*    This  is   also   aid   outside   the
framework  of  the  UN  with  the  political  purpose   of  under-
mining   the   parliamentary    regime   which   we   fear   might
reinstal  Lumumba.
The  U.S.  press  continues  to  remain  silent   on  the   Rocke-
feller  interests  in  the  Katanga,  and  the  role  these  interests
are  playing   behind  the   scenes   to  obtain   a  Congolese   gov-
ernment  amenable  to  them.    Their  latest  hope  is  Kasavubu,
who  made  a  lamb-like  debut  at  the  UN.   How establish  law
and  order  in  a  new  country   when  our  government   maneu-
vers  so  openly  to  obtain  a  puppet  regime?
*According  to  a  story  in  the   New   York  Herald-Tribune
Nov.  5  these  visiting  officers   refused  at  Fort   Dix  even  to
touch  the  new  M-14  rifles  being  shown  them.    One  of  them
said,  "We are  soldiers,  yes,  but  we  want  to  build  a  country,
not  kill  our brothers." What can  one do with  such  primitives?
How  the  Belgians  Are  Slowly  Taking  Over  Control  of  the  Congo  Again
"There  is  clear  evidence  of  the  steady  return,  in   recent
weeks,  of  Belgians  to  the  Congo,  and  within  this  frame-
work,  of  increasing  Belgian   participation   in  political  and
administrative  activities  .  .  .  Belgian  military  and para-
military  personnel  as  well  as  civilian  personnel   continue
to  be  available  to  authorities  in  the  Congo.  .  .  .
"Soon  after  a  measure  of  security  had  been  re-established
in  the  Congo,  a  recruiting  agency  for  the  Congo  was  set
up  in  Brussels  .  .  .  the  object  of  the  agency  seems  to  be
to  assist  in  re-establishing   a  civil  service  of   Belgian   na-
tionality  principally  at  the  policy  level.  .  .  .
"As  a  result  of  the  concerted  activities  of  the  recruiting
agency,  the  task  of  ONUC  [United   Nations  Organization
for  the  Congo]  has  been  made  more  difficult.    For  example,
in  the  Ministry  of   Economic  Co-ordination  and  Planning,
the  Chef  de  Cabinet  Adjoint  has  been  responsible   for  de-
laying   the  submission   of   applications  for   U.N.   technical
aid.  .  .  .  Similarly   in  other  ministries,  co-operation  with
ONUC,  vital  to  its  smooth  functioning,  has  been  hampered
in  various  ways  by  high-ranking:  Belgians. ...
"U.N.  documents  and  reports  have  frequently  been  with-
held   from   the   Congolese   officials   in   the   ministries,   and
propaganda  has  been   engineered   regarding   the   supposed
dangers  of  the  emergence  of  U.N.  trusteeship.  .  .  .
"Belgian  influence  is  also  seen  in  the  military  field.  A
Belgian  colonel,  who recently  arrived from  Brazzaville,  acts
as  an  adviser  to  the  Leopoldville  Ministry  of  National  De-
fense,   while  a  former  Belgian   warrant  officer   serves   as
aide  de  camp  to  Colonel  Mobutu,  with  the  rank  of  captain.
Thirty-six  Congolese,  recently  promoted  to  second  lieuten-
ants,  have  been  sent  by  Colonel   Mobutu   to  Brussels   for
military   training.
"In  Katanga,  Belgian  influence  is  omnipresent.    Virtually
all  key  civilian  and  security  posts  are  either  held  directly
by  officials  of  Belgian  nationality  or  controlled  by  advisers
to   recently  appointed  and  often  . inexperienced    Congolese
officials   .  .  .   within   the  security   forces,   there   are  114
Belgian   officers   and  117  Belgians   of   other  ranks  in   the
Gendarmerie',  and  58  Belgian   officers   in  the  police.  .  .  .
In  the  so-called  'Autonomous  State  of  South  Kasai'  there
is  also  a  considerable  Belgian  presence.    The  current  em-
phasis  there  is  on  warlike  preparations  directed  by  a  Colo-
nel  Creyecoeur,  serving  in  Belgian   uniform. ...
"Belgian   activities   in  recent   weeks   have  increased   the
intransigeance  of  the  ANC  [Congolese  army]  command  as
well   as  of   the   Katangese   authorities,   inhibited   peaceful
political'  activity  and  therefore  the  possibility  of  an  even-
tual  return  to  constitutional   government."
—The  Situation  in  the  Republic  of  the  Congo,  Report  from  Ambassador  Dayal  to  Secretary  General Hammarakjold,  Nov. t
1   B  :.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  U,  1960
Seven  Members  of  Liberal  Project  and  Many  Other  House  Progressives  Reelected
Chas.  Porter  and  "Peace  Congressmen"  Meyer  and  Johnson  Defeated
The  worst  news  of  the  campaign  was  the  defeat  of  five
members  of  the   12-man  so-called  Liberal  Project  which  had
sought  to  be  a  ginger  group  within  the  Democratic  party,  in-
cluding   the   two   "peace   Congressmen"    Byron   Johnson   of
Colorado  and  Wm.  H.  Meyer  of  Vermont,   and  Charles   O.
Porter  of  Oregon.
Both  Johnson  and  Porter  were  defeated  in  Red  smear  cam-
paigns.    The  former,  with  a  distinguished  record  as  an  econo-
mist  and  political  scientist,  was  called  soft  on  communism   for
having  advocated  recognition  of  Red  China.    Mr.  Porter,  after
four  years in the  House  where  he  had  distinguished  himself  by
his   courage  particularly  on  Latin  American   affairs,   was  at-
tacked  for  being  friendly  to  Castro.
Mr.  Meyer,  a  professional  forester,  the first  Democrat  to  be
elected  from  Vermont  in  many years, won  two  years  ago  on  a
platform  calling  for  recognition  of  Peking.  This  year  he  was
the  victim  of  a  Republican  sweep  in  northern  New  England
which   also  retired   the   two   Democratic  Congressmen   from
Maine  though  neither  had  the  disadvantage  of  unconventional
views.    Actually  Mr.  Meyer  ran  ahead  of  Kennedy  while  his
successful   opponent,   former  Governor   Stafford,   ran   behind
Nixon.     Mr.   Porter's   two   terms   were   memorable   for   his
championship  of  better  relations  with  Latin  America  and  his
one-man   campaign   against  Trujillo;   Mr.   Johnson   and   Mr.
Meyer  were  badly  needed  voices  for  a  saner  foreign   policy.
We  hope  all three  will  be back  soon.
The   other   two  members  of   the   Liberal  Project   defeated
were  Leonard  G.  Wolf,  victim  of  the  anti-Catholic  undercur-
rent  which  swept  Iowa  into  the  Republican  column   despite
steadily  declining farm  income,  and  George  A.  Kasem  of  Los
Angeles,   the   first   Congressman   of   Arab   American   origin.
Both  Wolf  and  Kasem were  thoughtful  and  enlightened  men.
We  note  with  pleasure  that  seven  other   members  of   the
Liberal  Project  were  reelected:  Clem  Miller  and  James  Roose-
velt   of   California;  Kastenmeier   and   Reuss   of   Wisconsin;
Moorhead  of  Pennsylvania;  James  O'Hara  of  Michigan   and
Frank  Thompson   of  New  Jersey.    We   regret  the  defeat  of
three  other  progressives;  Roy  Wier  of  Minnesota,  often  dur-
Hardly  A  Moral  Victory
We  were  not  present   at  the   UN   when  it  voted  on
the   Cuban  request   that   its   complaint   of  U.S.  inter-
vention  and  aggression   be   placed  before   the  plenary
session   of   the   General  Assembly   but   the  transcript
of  the  debate  and  the  final  vote  show  that  this   affair
was  hardly  a  moral  victory  for  the  U.S.   The  Cuban
motion   was   voted  down  by   45  to   29  with  18  absten-
tions,  i.e. by  a  majority  of   those  present.    Of  the  88
non-Communist  members  of  the  Assembly,  a  bare  ma-
jority  of  one  was  mustered  for  the  U.S.   Burma, India
and   Ethiopia,   while   expressing    no   opinion   on   the
merits   of   the   Cuban   complaint,   supported   Cuba    (as
Burma  phrased  it)  in  "sincere  belief  that  when  a  small
country  brings   up  a  charge   against   a  very  powerful
neighboring  country  of  having  the  intent   to   aggress,
that  charge  should  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the
General  Assembly  as   promptly  as   possible."     Of  our
Latin  American  neighbors  only  two  spoke  up,  Guate-
mala  and  Costa  Rica,  but  neither  defended  U.S. policy.
Ecuador,  Mexico,  Panama,  Venezuela  and  Bolivia  were
among   the   abstainers.     Of   the   new   African   States,
only  Madagascar voted  against  Cuba.   Ethiopia, Ghana,
Guinea,   India,  Indonesia,   Iraq,   Libya,  Mali,  Morocco,
Negal,   Nigeria,   Saudi  Arabia,  United  Arab  Republic,
Yemen,   Afghanistan,    Burma,   Cambodia   and   Ceylon
voted  for  the  Cuban  motion.    The  U.S. victory   shunted
the  complaint  to  the  Political  Committee where  it  may
not  be  reached  for  some   weeks.
ing  his  12  years  in  Congress  the  only  vote  against  the   Un-
American   Activities  Committee,   victim   of   a  well   financed
campaign  by  General  Mills;  Randall  S.  Harmon   of   Indiana
and   James  M.  Quigley  of  Pennsylvania,  the  latter  both  de-
feated  by  the  anti-Catholic  undertow  in  rural  areas.
We  note  with  pleasure   the  reelertion  to  the  House  of  a
goodly  number  of  progressives:   Stewart   Udall  of   Arizona;
Jeff   Cohelan,  John  F.  Shelley  and  B.  F.  Sisk  of   California;
Frank  Kowalski  and  Robert  N.  Giaimo  of  Connecticut; Bar-
rett  O'Hara  and  Sidney  Yates  of  Illinois;  John  Brademas  of
Indiana;  John  Blatnik  of  Minnesota;  John  V.  Lindsay, an  able
young  Republican  from  New  York  City;  Charles  A.  Vanik  of
Ohio;  Edith  Green  of  Oregon,  and  Ken  Hechler  of  West  Va.
fFS  Speaks  on  the  Congressional  Witch  Hunt  at  Washington  University,  St.  Louis,  Nov. 17,  and  on  the  Cuba
and  Congo  Crises  at  Miami  University,   Oxford,   Ohio, Nov.  18
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  ATC.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D,  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/14/60
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Tes  D    No  O
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  8.  1879.   Postdated  Mondays but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  L  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Huuunr,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  In  the  U.  S.:  6  In
Canada;    $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  flB  to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED