I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960apr04.pdf

============================================================

How  Close Is A  Nuclear  Pact? P.  4
Meany  and  Lovestone  Making  U.  S.  Labor  Sounding  Board  for  Adenauer  Line,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  13
APRIL  4,  1960
.'°'     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
Will  the  Democrats  Invite  the  Label  of War  Party?
It   is  one  of   the  oddities  of  the   Anglo-American  alliance
that  their  left-of-center  opposition party  presses  more  strongly
than   the   Conservatives   for   summitry  while   ours   regards
negotiation  and  relaxation  of  tension  with  suspicion.    Prime
Minister  Macmillan  flew  back  from   the   Camp  David   talks
with   President  Eisenhower  sure   of   even   warmer   applause
from  the  Laborites  than  from  his  own  party.  There  the  op-
position  is  to  the  left  of  the  government  on  the  question  of
how  far  to  go  on  the  path  of  concessions  for  peace;  here  the
opposition  is  to  the  right  of  the  government,  and  ever  watch-
ful  for  an  opportunity  to  criticize  any  step  toward  settlement
as  "appeasement."    This  picture  may  be  fatal  to  Democratic
hopes  in  November,  for  the  counter-proposal  by Eisenhower
and  Macmillan to  the  Russians puts  the  issue of. a  nuclear  test
ban  squarely  into  politics.    The  "gentlemen's  agreement"   to
suspend   the   smaller  tests  while   detection   systems  are   per-
fected  cannot  constitutionally  bind  the  President's  successor.
The   question  of   which  candidate  and   which   party  can  be
trusted  to  carry  on  the  Eisenhower  initiative  will  be  decisive
for  many  voters  since  it  is generally  feared  that  resumption  of
testing  would  be  the   end  of  humanity's  last  hope  for  pre-
venting  a  new  war.
A  "Yes"  Qualified to  Ambiguity
No  doubt  any Democratic candidate  will  try  to  be  equivocal
enough  on  the  issue  to  garner  votes  from   both  sides.     The
Washington   Star  has   already  queried   Humphrey,   Johnson,
Kennedy  and  Symington  on  whether  they  would  approve  a
moratorium  on  small  tests  extending  beyond  next  January  20
when  a  new  President  will  be  sworn  in.    The  Star  reported
March  27  that  it  received  a   "qualified   yes"   from   all  four
but  a  careful  reading  of  the  replies  will   show  that,   except
for   Humphrey,   the  other   Democratic   candidates   (including
Kennedy)   qualified  their  answers  to  the  point  of  meaning-
less  ambiguity.    Were  our  opposition   party  a  peace   party,
the  Democrats  would  have  stolen  some  of  the  limelight  from
the   Eisenhower-Macmillan   talks   by   a   statement   not   only
pledging   themselves   to  a  gentleman's   agreement  but   taking
credit  for  the  fact  that  it  was  Adlai  Stevenson  who  first  sug-
gested   cessation  of  testing  and  Hubert  Humphrey   who  pro-
posed  this  very  compromise  months  ago.    There  were  those
in  the  Democratic  Advisory  Council  who  favored  some  such
move  early  last   week   for   release   before    the   Camp   David
talks   ended   but   they  got   nowhere.     After   all,   the   Demo-
cratic  party has  been  the  ally  of  all  those  military  and  atomic
elements  in  the  Administration  which  have  been  mutinously
undercutting  the  President's  moves  toward  peace.    Those  of
us  who  are  normally  Democratic  are  grateful   to  Mr.   Eisen-
hower  for  the  sudden  burst  of  energy  on  the  President's  part
which  finally  brought  about  positive  decisions  on  the  eve  of
Getting  Ready to Detect  "Moonquakes"
In   those  areas   of   seismic   detection  which   do   not
involve   disarmament,   the   government's  experts   seem
confident   of   developing  devices  which  can   detect   at
distances  considerably  greater  than  Irkutsk  or  Omsk.
It  is  only  in  the  seismology   which  might  lead  to  an
arms   agreement  that  stress   is   on   the   negative,   on
what  can't  be  done.    A  scientist   friend,  for  example,
told  us  he  heard  we  were  developing means  to  mon-
itor    seismic    shocks—"moonquakes"—on    the    moon,
which   even  the   AEC  might   admit  is   somewhat  less
accessible   than  the  Soviet  Union.
We  checked  around  the  capital  for  confirmation  and
found  it   at   the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Ad-
ministration.    We  were  told  by  its   press   officer  that
NASA  has  parallel contracts with  Caltech  and  Lament
Observatory   at   Columbia   for   the   development   of   a
"missile   transportable,  hard   landing"  instrument  for
the   detection   of   seimic  disturbances.    This  is  to  be
dropped  on  the  moon  and  telemeter  its   reports  back
to  earth.    Each  contract  is  for  $130,000.   The  device
is  to  be  ready  by  1963.   Since  the  principles  of  seismic
detection   and  telemetry  are   well   understood,   this   is
not  considered  too  difficult   an  assignment.
Of  course,  if  it  became  necessary  to  make  a  moon
monitoring   agreement   with   the    Soviet    Union,    we
would  expect  to  be  warned  by  Dr.  Teller  that  moon-
quakes   might   be   muffled    in   moonbeams  and   sub-
lunatic   nuclear   explosions   hidden   in   large   holes   of
green  cheese.
Macmillan's  visit,  and  the  agreement  at  Camp  David.    Unless
the  Democratic  candidate is  someone like  Stevenson  or  Hum-
phrey whose  record  is some guarantee  of  an  extended  test  ban,
even  Nixon  may  not  scare  us  away  from  voting  Republican.
The   untrustworthiness  of   the  Democrats  on  this  issue  is
dramatized   by  the   immediate  negativism   registered   toward
any  nuclear  test  cessation  by  the  leading  Democrats   on   the
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  Senators  Anderson  and
Gore, and  Representative Chet  Holifield.    They  leaped  to  echo
the  alarmist  views of  the  AEC before  they knew  the  content of
the   Russian  offer   and   without   waiting   for   the   President's
counter-offer.   The  Russian  offer  was  on  Saturday,  March  19.
Anderson  was on  the  Senate floor calling  it  "phony"  on  Tues-
day,  March  22.    But  in  the  Senate  March  28,  under  criticism
from   cooler   heads  like  Clark  of  Pennsylvania,  he  admitted
that  the  Joint  Committee  and  the  Senate  Foreign   Relations
Committee   "had   nothing   [as  Anderson   said]  on  which   to
base  an  accurate judgment until  late  Friday afternoon,"  March
25.    So long  as  such  leading  Democrats  are  so quick  to  spread
confusion  and  suspicion  of  so crucial  a move  toward  peace,  the
Democrats   invite  the   label   of   war   party.    This   could   be
deadly  in November.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, April  4,1960
Frankfurter  Defends  Practices  He  Protested   40  Years  Ago  in  the  Palmer  Red Raid
Sloppy  Counter-intelligence  and  Sloppy  Law Work  in  the  Abel  Case
When  a  Soviet  agent  named  Hayhanen  defected  in   1957
and  put  his  finger  on  his  superior,  a  Col.  Abel,  he  handed
American  authorities  an  unusual  opportunity.    By  patiently
watching  Abel,  they could uncover his  American contacts, per-
haps  infiltrate  the  Soviet  network  by  putting  false  agents  at
Abel's  disposal.    His  arrest  within  a  few  weeks  instead  and
his  trial  with  Hayhanen  as  a  witness  against  him  was  glam-
orous  publicity  for  the  FBI  but  poor  counter-intelligence.
The  legal  tactics of  the  FBI  were  as  sloppy.  Too  impatient
to  try  and  catch  Abel  "in  the  act",  the  FBI  decided  to  arrest
him  after  a  month's  surveillance.    It  could  have  obtained  a
warrant  for  his  arrest  on  the  basis of  Hayhanen's information.
It  decided  against  this,  perhaps  fearing  that  Hayhanen's  iden-
tity  would  have  to  be  revealed.    If  so,  this 'was  a  poor  guess
since   the   Supreme   Court   in  a  narcotics   case   last   Monday
(Jones   v.   U.S.)   with  only  Mr.  Justice  Douglas   dissenting,
ruled  that  a  warrant  can  be  obtained  without  the  informant's  -
disclosure.
Three Weeks In  Solitary
The  FBI  got  the  Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service  to
issue  a  warrant  for   Abel's   deportation;   such  warrants  are
issued  in  administrative privacy without  going to  a  magistrate.
FBI  agents  then  entered  Abel's  room  and  tried  to  get  him  to
"cooperate."   When  he  refused,  they summoned  the  immigra-
tion  officers,  went  through  his  belongings  with  a  search  war-
rant, flew him  secretly to a  special  detention  camp  1,000  miles
away,   and   held   him   three   weeks  in   solitary  confinement.
When,  after  prolonged   interrogation,   Abel  still  declined  to
cooperate,  he  was  charged  with  espionage.    This  was  so  glar-
ingly  inconsistent  with  the  Fourth   Amendment's  guarantees
against  prolonged   detention  without  arraignment  and  unlaw-
ful  search, -that  the  government  came within  one  vote  of  hav-
ing  Abel's  conviction  reversed  by  the  Supreme  Court.
A  shift  in  the  position  of  Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  saved  the
FBI  from  a  humiliating defeat  in  an  otherwise  open-and-shut
espionage   case  endangered  by  its  own  TV-style  melodrama-
Some  fascinating  history  lies  behind  the  reference  in  Mr.  Jus-
tice Frankfurter's  5-to-4 decision to  Colyer  v.  Skefington   (265
F  17).   He  said  he  would  not  have  upheld  the  Abel  convic-
tion  if  in  it  the  immigration  service,  as  in  Colyer,  had  only
Un-American to Criticize the Un-Ams?
In  the  Spanish   Inquisition,  any  criticism  of  the  Holy
Office  was  itself  proof  of  heresy.    The  Supreme  Court
has  taken  up  a  similar   question  in  granting  certiorari
in  the  Frank   Wilkinson  case.   A  former  Los  Angeles
New   Deal   housing    official,   Mr.   Wilkinson   has   been
campaigning   for   several   years  to   abolish  the   House
Un-American     Activities    Committee.     In     December,
1956,  he  was  called  before   it  in  Los  Angeles  but  re-
fused  on  principle  to  answer  any  questions.    No  action
was   taken   against   him.     On   July   23,   1958,   within
hours  of   arriving   in  Atlanta,   Georgia,  to  protest  the
Committee's   hearings   on   "subversion    in   the   South,"
Mr.  Wilkinson   was  again  subpoenaed.    Again  he  re-
fused   to   answer.     He  was  accused  of   trying   to  stir
up   animosity    against   the   Committee.     Among   the
questions    put   to   the   Court   in   the   petition   for   cer-
tiorari   were   (1)   whether   the  Committee  was   author-
ized  to  investigate  propaganda  against  itself  and  (2)  if
it   was,   whether   such    authorization    did   not    violate
the  First   Amendment.
been  used  "as  the  cat's  paw"  for  the  FBI.
Forty  years  ago  Attorney  General  A.  Mitchell  Palmer  and
a  young  Federal  agent  named  J.  Edgar  Hoover,  using  3,000
deportation  warrants  obtained  from   the  immigration  service,
superintended  the  arrest  in  a  single  night  of  4,000  suspected
radicals.   This  was  the  notorious  Palmer  "red  raid."   Twelve
leading  jurists  filed  a  famous  report  denouncing  these  illegal
methods  and  two  of  them  appeared  in  defense  of  those  ar-
rested   in   the   Colyer  case.   These   were  two   Harvard  Law
School  professors,  Zechariah   Chafee,  Jr.,   and   Felix   Frank-
furter.    Then  as  now,  the  immigration  service  acted  as  cat's
paw  for  the  FBI.    It  is  hard  to  see a  difference.
The  dissenters, Warren,  Black, Douglas  and  Brennan, threw
back  at  Frankfurter  words he  used  dissenting ten  years  ago  in
the  Rabinowitz  case  about  the  police  state  practice  of  using
arrest  on  a  minor charge  as  a  cover for  search  and  seizure  on
a  more serious matter. The  FBI,  as Justices Douglas  and Black
pointed  out,  is given  a  way  to  circumvent the  Fourth Amend-
ment  "by  the  simple  device of  wearing  the  masks of immigra-
tion  officials  while  in  fact  they are  preparing  a  case for  crimi-
nal  prosecution."
Best   Analysis  We've  Seen  of   Just  How  Phony  the  House  Civil  Rights  Bill  Is
"The  civil  rights  bill  passed  by  the  House  might  have
been  a  significant   achievement  in  McKinley's   day.   As  the
1960  version  of  a  bill   to  protect  constitutional  rights,   it
can  only  be  counted  a  failure.    Look  at  the  hurdles  that
stand  in  the  way  of  registration  of  Negro  citizens  under
the  House  bill:
"First,  the  Attorney   General  must  institute  a  suit  under
the   1957  Civil   Rights  Act;   in  2'/
2
   years,  he  has  brought
only   four   or  five  cases  over  the  entire  South.
"Second,  even  after  the  Attorney   General   wins  the  case,
he   must   prove   'a   pattern   of   discrimination'  before   the
referee  provision  comes  into  effect.
"Third,   even  though  the  state  voting  registrar  has  been
legally   adjudged   guilty   of  systematic   discrimination,   the
Negro  applicant  must  take  the  humiliating  and  sometimes
perilous  course  of  seeking  out  and  attempting  to  register
before  that  hostile  state   official.
"Fourth,  the  Negro  applicant  must  go  before  the  referee
and  prove  that  state  officials  denied  him  registration.
"Fifth,   the   Negro   applicant    must    appear    before    the
judge,   if   the   state   objects   to   the   referee's   report,   and
prove  his  case  once  again.
"Bluntly    put,   the   referee   provision   as   passed   by   the
House   may   well   be  a  step   backwards.     Under   the    19*57
Civil   Rights   Act,   it   seems   quite   likely   that   a   court   of
equity   could  now  adopt  a  more   expeditious   and  less  bur-
densome   referee  system.
"The  leadership  is  attempting  to  pressure  Senators,  with
the  threat  that  if  they  attempt  to  improve  the  House  bill,
they   will   risk   a  stalemated   House-Senate    conference   and
perhaps  no  bill  at  all.    In  view  of  the  inadequacies  of  the
House  bill,  little  is  being   risked;  those  who  are  concerned
with  civil  rights  should  be  ready   to  run  that   risk   to  get
a  bill   worthy   of   the  name."
—Letter  (slightly   abridged)   by  Joseph  L. Rauh, Jr., and
William   Taylor,   of  Americans  for   Democratic  Action   in
Washington  Post, March 29.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  4, I960
AFL-CIO,  On Eve  of  Summit  Talks,  to  Hold  "No  Concessions"  Foreign  Policy  Parley
Meany  and  Lovestone  To  Make  U.S.  Labor  An  Adenauer  Sounding  Board
On  the  eve  of  the  summit  talks,  the  AFL-CIO   will   stage
a   Conference  on  World   Affairs   in   New   York   City   April
19-20  designed  to  sell  the  American  public  the  "no  relaxa-
tion  of  tension"  line  espoused  by  Chancellor   Adenauer.  The
Conference  as  announced  in  the  March  26  issue  of  the  AFL-
CIO  News,  will  be  a  sounding  board  for  those  who  oppose
world   settlement   and  a  slowing   down  of   the  arms  race.
The  conference  reflects  the  close  cooperation  between  AFL-
CIO  President   George  Meany  and  the  German   Chancellor.
Last  December,  during  a  recess  in  the  International   Confed-
eration  of  Trade  Unions   meeting   in  Brussels,  Meany  went
up  to  Bonn  with  his  eminence  grise,  Jay  Lovestone.   There
they  were  both  awarded  medals  (the   so-called  Free  German
Award)   by  Adenauer   (see   picture   in  the  AFL-CIO    News,
Dec   19).
Meany's  Ex-Communist Adviser  on Foreign  Policy
Lovestone,  head   of  the  American  Communist  party  until
1929  when  he  was  removed  by  Stalin,  and  later  leader   until
1940   of  a  splinter  group  known  as  the  "Lovestonite"  Com-
munists,   became   a  protege   of   David   Dubinsky   and   then
foreign    affairs   adviser   to   Meany.   His   views   (see   box   in
an  adjoining  column)   are  also  those  of  the  China  and  arma-
ment   lobbies.
When   the   Chancellor   was  in   Washington    he   definitely
failed  to  sell  the  President  quite  the  frozen  posture  he  would
like  the  U.S.   to  adopt   at  the  summit   conference.    But  he
found   accord   at   AFL-CIO   headquarters.      The   March   19
issue  of  the  AFL-CIO   News   carried  a  picture  of  the  Chan-
cellor   visiting   the   AFL-CIO   and   being   greeted   by  Meany.
The  caption  said  Meany  told  Adenauer  "labor  believes   there
can  be  'no  concessions'   in  negotiations   'which  would  in  any
way  jeopardize  the  freedom  and  security  of  the  two  million
residents  of West  Berlin.' "
The   arrangements   for   the   conference,   as  announced   in
the  AFL-CIO   News,  will  give  no  forum  to  those  who  be-
lieve  in  the  necessity  of  negotiation,  in  the  ending  of  nuclear
tests  or  in  disarmament.     Meany  will  be  the  keynote  speaker
opening  day  April  19  with  an  address  on  "American   Labor
and  the  World  Crisis."   The  April  20  session  will  be  opened
by  Gen.  John  B: Medaris,  recently  retired  chief  of  the  Army's
missile   program,   and   a   principal   source   of   alarms   about
"the   missile    gap."
Gen.  Medaris  will  be  followed  by Dr.  Henry  A.  Kissinger
of   Harvard,   who   rose   to   prominence   as   research    director
for   the   Rockefeller   report   urging   a   sharp   step-up   in   the
Lovestone's Foreign Pqlicy
"Today  the  A.F.  of  L.  in  no  small  measure  through
its  free  trade  union  committee,  opposes  vigorously   (1)
every   Communist   and  Titoist  maneuver  to   penetrate
the  International Confederation of  Free  Trade  Unions,
(2)   every   effort   to   recognize  and  admit  Communist
China  into  the  UN,  (3)  extending trade  relations  with
Soviet   orbit,'  (4)   putting  faith  in  the  Kremlin's  'new
look'  and  coexistence  hoax,  (5)   slackening  American
rearmament  and  free  world  collective  security   meas-
ures."
—Jay   Lovestone,  letter   published  in   George  Sokol-
sky's   column,  Washington  Post,  Jan.  lit,  1955.
arms   program.     Dr.   Kissinger   is  an   advocate   of   "limited
nuclear   war."     The   main   speaker   at   the   dosing   session
Wednesday  afternoon  will  be  Wm.  C.  Foster,  former   dep-
uty   secretary   of   defense,   and   chairman   of   the    committee
which  fathered   the  alarmist  "Gaither  report"   several   years
ago  advising  bigger   arms   spending.
The   AFL-CIO   News   bills   this  program   as  designed   to
give   the   nation   "competent   clarification"   (our   italics)   of
the   problems   "to   be  dealt   with   at   the   East-West   summit
meeting."     The  other   speakers  announced   are  Prof.   Frank
Tannenbaum  of  Columbia  on  Western  hemisphere   problems;
Prof.  David  N.   Rowe  of  Yale   on  the  Far   East;  and   Dr.
Ernest   Grigg,   of   the   UN   on   Africa   and   the   Near   East.
Perhaps   as  a  sop  to   those  who   regard   this   as  too   one-
sided  a  program  there  will  be  a  dinner  April   20  after    the
conference   closes   to   be   presided   over   by  Walter   Reuther
with  Under  Secretary of  State  Dillon  as  the  featured  speaker.
No  address  by  Reuther,  who  does  not  see  eye  to  eye  with
Meany  on  foreign   policy,   is   scheduled.
Differences  in  foreign  policy  between  Meany  and  Reuther
reflect  the  differences   between  the  A.F.  of  L.  and  the   CIO.
The  former,  under  the  influence  first  of  Matthew  Woll  and
then  of  Dubinsky  and   Lovestone,   was  to  the   right  of   the
Roosevelt  Administration  on  foreign  policy  as  Meany  today
is  to  the  right  of  Eisenhower.    The  A.  F.  of  L.  has  never
really   been   reconciled   to   recognition   of   the   Soviet   Union,
a  step  it  opposed   at  the  time  in    1933.
On  the  other  hand,  the  CIO  under  Murray  and  Hillman
as  under  Reuther,  consistently  took  a  more  progressive   atti-
tude.     Between  Reuther   and   Lovestone   there   is  bad  blood
which   goes   back   to   the   30's   when   Lovestone's   protege,
Homer  Martin,  tried  by  strong  arm  and  other  dubious  meth-
ods  to  establish   a  rival  auto  union.
One  Congressman Speaks  Out  Amid  Festivities  Here  for  Franco's  Foreign Minister
"Mr.   Speaker,   at   the   risk   of   sounding   a   sour,   even
inhospitable   note,   permit   me  to  list   a   few   facts   about
Spain's  Foreign  Minister,  now  here  in  Washington  on  an
official   visit.     Senor   Castiella   and   the   present   Spanish
Ambassador  in  Washington  wrote  a  book  in  1941  praising
Hitler  and  Mussolini extravagantly  and  mocking  the  dem-
ocratic  countries then  engaged  in  the  war.   Here's  a sample
of   what  they  wrote:
" 'Non-belligerent   Spain  -does   not   conceal   her   fervent
cordiality  toward  one  of   the  two  sides  in  the  war  which
was   unleashed  on   September  1,   1939,  five  months   after
we  achieved  our  own  victory,  in   an  act   of   indescribable
insanity   by   the   British   and  French  democracies  against
the  Third  Reich  under  Adolph  Hitler."
"During  World  War  II  our  distinguished  visitor  fought
in  the  Spanish  Blue  Division with  the  Germans  against  the
Soviet  Union.   He  was  awarded the  Iron  Cross.   After  the
war,   the   British   refused   to   accept   him   as   Ambassador*
from  Spain.   One of  his  jobs  in  Spain  today  is  to  blacklist
Catholics  who  indicate  a  dislike  for  Franco.
"Communication  is   necessary   between  all   governments.
However,   it   is   to  be   hoped  that   the   President   realizes
that,  for  this  gentleman  and  his  despotic  government,  the
formal  handshake,  not  the  warm  embrace,  is  appropriate."
—Chas. 0. Porter  (D.  Ore.) in  the House  of  Representatives,  March  23.
5   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  4, 1960
"No Basis for  Optimism"
But  Worried All  the  Same
"Official   sources   here   are  doubtful  that  the   Eisen-
hower-Macmillan  formula  for  a  nuclear  test   ban  will
produce  an  early   agreement   .  .  .  The  record   of   the
nuclear  test  ban  conference  suggests  to  experts   here
[in  Washington]  that  no  basis   exists   for   optimism."
—New  York  Times,  Wm.  J.  Jorden,  March  30.
"The   new   Washington   policy   will   undoubtedly   be
greeted   as   good   news  by  world  public  opinion  .  .  .
But    many   responsible    officials—particularly    in    the
AEC   and   in   the   Defense    Dept.—view    the    decision
with  pessimism   and  alarm  .  .  .
"Most   observers,   however,  are   less   worried  about
the   possibility  of   undetectable   violations   of   the pro-
jected  test  ban  .  .  .  than  they  are  about  the  psycho-
logical    relaxation    .   .   .   Western    military    defenses
might   suffer."
—New  York  Times, Hanson  W. Baldwin, same  day.
Soviet  "Christmas   Package"  Offer  to  Compromise  Four  Major Questions  Still  Unanswered
A  Nuclear  Test  Ban Treaty  Could  Be Reached  Quickly  If  We  Wanted  It
Given   the   desire  to   agree,   a  treaty  is  much  closer   than
the   dispellers   of   gloom   would   have   us   believe.     The   day
after  President  Elsenhower's  proposal  Feb. 11  for  a   limited
treaty,  Tsarapkin  had  already  told   reporters   at   Geneva   the
idea  of  such  a  treaty  plus  a  moratorium  on  the  smaller  shots
"would  be  a  different  thing"  and  "would  have  to  be  con-
sidered."    (New  York   Times,  Feb. 13).   On  Feb. 26  the
Soviet   Union   agreed   to  joint  research  on  detection   once  a
treaty   banning   all   tests   was   signed   without   waiting   for
ratification.    At  the  same  time  it  was  disclosed  by  the  British
delegate  that  Khrushchov  had  offered  to  reconsider  the  quota
of   veto-free   inspections   every   two   years   on   the   basis   of
experience  gained  in  operating  the  control  system.    (Wash.
Post,  Feb. 27).     Earlier,  on  Jan.  15,  Tsarapkin   indicated
that  if  the  number  of  veto-free  inspections  were  decided   it
would  be  easy  to  agree  on  the  scientific  criteria  for   deter-
mining  a  suspicious   event  subject  to  inspection.    When  Sir
Michael  Wright   suggested   "provisional"   criteria,    Tsarapkin
was  friendly  to  the  idea  noting  that  since  it  would  take  two
or  three  years  to  set  up  the  control  system  "there  was  plenty
of   time   to   improve   upon   them"   (The  Times,    London,
Jan.  16).
Why  "Peaceful  Uses" Are An  Obstacle
There   is  some  evidence  that  we  have  been  allowing   the
question  of  peaceful  uses  to  stall  the  negotiations.     According
to  an  AP  dispatch  from  Geneva  (Baltimore  Sun, Feb.  24),
"the   Soviet  Union   reluctantly  agreed   a  year  ago  to   allow
peaceful   nuclear   blasts   to   be   continued   after   a   test   ban
treaty  was  signed"   but  only  on  condition   that   "such   blasts
be  conducted  with   devices  open   to   complete   inspection   by
all   parties   to   the • treaty."     The   U.S. delegation,    however,
insisted,  according  to  this  dispatch,   "that  American  devices
used  in  nuclear  blasts  for  peaceful  purposes   remain  secret."
Obviously  if  the  device  is  secret,  there  is  no  way  of  knowing
whether  its  detonation  may  not  be  yielding  weapon   improve-
ments  under  the  guise  of  advancing  peaceful   uses.    "Inter-
national  observation"   of   a  peaceful  blast  with   no  right   to
know  what  was  being  exploded   would  be  meaningless,   and"
the  U.S. would  be  the  first  to  protest   if   such   a  proposal
were  made  by  the  Russians.
There  are  also  indications  that  our  delegation   at  Geneva
has   been   dragging   its   heels,   perhaps   because  it   has   been
unable   to   get   clear   instructions  from   home.     Thus   there
has  yet  to  be  a  response  to  the  compromise  "Christmas  pack-
age"   offered   by  the  Russians  at  Geneva  on  Dec. 14  which
would  resolve  four  major  questions  still  undecided.    Tsarap-
kin   in  a  detailed  offer  (The Times,   London,  Dec. 15  gave
the  most  complete  account)   said  that  if   the  West  accepted
the  Russian  position  on  the  makeup  of  the  control  commis-
sion   (three  Western   nations,  three  Soviet  and  one  neutral),
the  Russians would  in  large  part  accept  the  Western  position
on   the   staffing   of   control   posts  (one third   Russian,   one
third  Anglo-American, one  third  neutral),  for  voting  proce-
dure  in  the  control  commission  and  for  budgetary  procedure.
Sir   Michael   Wright,   the   British   delegate,    said   this   was
"warmly  welcomed"  as  "an  important  step  forward."     Our
delegate,  Mr.   Wadsworth,   said  only  that  the  package  pro-
posal  had  "some  interesting things  in  it."   No  clear  response
has  been  given,  and  the  topics  covered  by  the  offer   are  still
listed   as  unsettled.
Please  Call  A  Friend  Today   Who  Should  Be  Reading  the  Weekly  and  Sell  Him  or  Her  A  Subscription
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska Ave,
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew
Qii-aat
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street  ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
N.  W.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
.........................Zone............State........
"i'/'i/'eo
for  $2 (6 mos.) or  $4 (1 yr.) additional:
.........................Zone............State........
gift  announcement?          Yes  D
'NO'D
LE Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated   Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except   the  last   two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5fil8  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  18,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
fc  in  the  U.  S.;  M  In  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED