I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jul04.pdf

============================================================

Negro  Sitdowns and  the  Golf   Course Ruling,  P.  3
Mansfield  in  Senate  Speech   Debunks  Ike's   "Pearl   Harbor"  Alibi  for  U-2  Flights,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  26
JULY  4,  1960
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Our  Overseas  Bases  the  Key  Issue  in  the  Arms  Deadlock
In  assessing  the  world  situation  in  the  wake  of  the   arms
conference  breakdown,  some  basic  observations  may  be  help-
ful.    The   first   is  that   disarmament  conferences  historically
have  been   exercises  in   futility   and   chicanery;   this  was  true
before  the  First  World  War  and  before  the  Second;  in  nego-
tiations  between  the  Powers  before  Communism,  and   in  the
rivalry  of  the  20's  between  the  Western   powers  when  Soviet
Russia  was  still  cordoned   off  and   Germany  still  weak.    The
power   of  the  military  bureaucracies,  buttressed  by  the  indus-
tries  which   benefited   from   the   arms  race,  was   steadily   ap-
plied,   and   proved   overwhelming  against  the   efforts   of   an
outnumbered   handful  of   the   thoughtful,   fitfully   supported
by  the  occasional  anxieties  of   the  masses.
Procrastination,   Not  Negotiation
It   may   be   difficult    to   determine   Russian   policy   in    the
current  juncture  but  it  is  easy  to  see  what  our  own  policy  is.
When  Mr.  Khrushchov  told  the  military  academy  in  Moscow
last   Tuesday   in   explaining  the   Geneva   walkout,   that   there
were   "no   negotiations  at   all,  only  procrastination,"   he  was
pretty   accurately   describing  the  attitude  the   U.S.   has   taken
toward   disarmament  since  the   death   of   Stalin   in   1953.    It
is  only   necessary  to   recall  that  when   our   own   allies  came
here  last  March  for  the  preliminary  talks  before  the  Geneva
conference   from  which  the  Soviet  delegates  have  just  walked
out,  "they  were  visibly  unhappy  because  the  U.S.  government
was  not  yet  ready  to  present  a  position."     The   quotation  is
from   a   study   released   last   Monday   by  the   National   Plan-
ning   Association  on   the   "perilously   casual"   way   in   which
our   government   has  prepared   for   disarmament  conferences.
A   nation   as  rich  in   managerial  skills  and   scientific  talents
as  ours   does   not   treat   so  casually  any   enterprise   in   which
it  is  really  interested.
Our  government   has  had  the  greatest   difficulty   in arriving
at   a  disarmament  program   because   its   multitude   of   inter-
agency  committees  has  had   to   reconcile  the   deep  animosity
of   Pentagon   and   AEC   to   disarmament   of   any   kind   with
the  tepid  desire  of  the  State Department  not  to  be  left  nakedly
without  any  proposals   at  all.    The   result  has  been   a   series
of   elaborate   but   tricky  "packages"   combining   a   maximum
of  inspection  with  a  minimum   of  disarmament.     This  effort
to  get  something   for  nothing   has  understandably   made   the
Russians   doubt   our   sincerity.    Even   now,   when   voices   are
beginning   to  be  heard   here  for  the  establishment   of   "arms
control   institutes"   and   "peace  agencies,"  the   argument   too
frequently   emphasizes   not   the   need   to   make   progress   on
disarmament  but  to  enable  us  more  skilfully  to  hold  up  our
end  propaganda-wise   in  negotiations   envisaged   as  lasting  in-
definitely.   The  feeble  rehash  Mr.  Eaton  promised  Mr.  Zorin
to  have  ready  "in  a  few  days"  just  before  the  latter  walked
Unheeded  Warning  on  Japan
"I   say   most  respectfully  that   we   shall   only   have
buried  our  heads  in  the  sand  if  we  blithely  go  forward
in  the  ratification of  this  treaty  on  the  basis  of  the  as-
sumption  that  all  is  well  in  U.S.-Japanese  relations ex-
cept  our relations with  Japanese  Communists. .  .  .  This
treaty   is   but   another  structure  in   the   containment
policy.  .  .  .  Our  Containment  policy  in  the  long  run  wilt
not  work.   When  I  say   it  will  not  work,  I  mean  it  will
not  win  the  peace. .  .  .  Such  a  policy as  this,  based  upon
a   bilateral   relation   between  the   U.S.   and  Japan  will
produce—what?    It  will  produce  a  further  strengthen-
ing  of  the arms race. ...  In future  sessions  of  Congress
proposals  will  be  made  to  strengthen  the  military  con-
tainment  implications  of  the  pending  Japanese  treaty.
There   may  be  those   who  think   that   we   can  continue
that  containment  policy,  with  an  ever  growing  increase
in  the  nuclear  armaments  program,  to  produce perma-
nent  peace  in  the  world.   Those  who think  so  ...     have
never  read the  history  I have read. .  .  . Armament  races
which  last  very  long  are  armament  races  that  end  in
war."
—Morse   <rn  the  Japanese  treaty,  U.S.  Senate  June  21.
1  0
out  is  very  much  in  the  pattern  of  our  past  "packages."    The
Russians  would  be  required  to  open  their  bases  for   inspec-
tion  first,  on  the  promise  of  some  unspecified  arms  reduction
later,   with   more   general   disarmament  left   to   a   millenium
reachable  only  over  a  road   rich  in  hidden  escape   routes.
Bases  Growing  Obsolete  Anyway
The  key  issue  in  the  arms  talks  (which  will  resume  before
the   United   Nations    in   September),   and   perhaps   the   key
issue   in   our   foreign   policy,   revolves   around   the   problem
of   bases.     From   their   dramatic  offer   of   May   10,   1955,   to
their   latest   at   the   abortive   10-nation   talks   in  Geneva,   the
Russians  have  offered   wide  measures  of   inspection  and   pro-
tection  against  surprise  attack  in  return  for  mutual  withdrawal
from   foreign   bases.     Some  years  ago  in  the   Weekly   I   sug-
gested  that   both   sides  had  much   to  gain   from   such   a  deal
before  their  bargaining  cards  turned  obsolete.   Within  a  few
years,   satellites   will   breach   many  secrets   within   the   Soviet
Union  and  as  for  our  forward  bases  they  are  already  growing
obsolete.    With   the   development   of   the   ICBM   and   the
Polaris   carrying   submarine,   foreign   bases   dwindle    in   im-
portance.    Their  real  function  more  and  more  is  intelligence
and   cloak-and-dagger    activity.   The   latest   Russian   offer   to
accept  international  inspection   teams  at  rocket  sites  to  enforce
elimination  of   ICBM's  in  return   for   liquidation   of    foreign
bases  has  much  to  recommend   it.    Unfortunately   our   military
would   rather   see  our   bases   liquidated,    as   they   are   slowly
being  liquidated,  under  political   pressure   and   obsolescence
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  4,1960
Mansfield  Debunks  the  Key  Administration Alibi  in  A  Thoughtful  Senate  Speech
Was  the  U-2  Flight  Justified   to  "Prevent  Another  Pearl  Harbor"?
"I   cannot   conceive  of   any  American  in   his   right   senses
answering  anything other  than  'no'  to  the  question  of  whether
or  not  we  want  another  Pearl  Harbor.   The  inference  of  the
question  is that  the  U-2  flight  program  was  vital  in  preventing
a  catastrophic  military  attack  on  the  security  of  this  Nation.
"If   the   U-2   flights   were  'vital'   to  prevent  another   Pearl
Harbor   then   they   should   have   been   made.     But,   equally,
they   should  have  been  made  under  the  continuous  scrutiny
of  the  President  and  the  coordinated  scrutiny  of  members  of
his   Cabinet.    The   facts   in   the   public  record   show  clearly,
however,  that  while  politically  responsible officials  knew  gen-
erally  of  this  program  of  U-2   flights  control  and   timing  of
them  was  in  the  hands  of  various  obscure employes.
Not  That  Important
"I  can  only  assume,  therefore,  that  while  the  flights  were
important,   they   were   not   regarded   as   really   so   important
as   to   command   the   continuing  attention  of   the  politically
responsible   officials   of   the   administration.    That   such   may
be  the   case  is  indicated  by  the   suspension  of   the  flights  by
the   President   and   his   assurance   to   Mr.   Khrushchev   that
they  would   not   be   resumed.
"The   fact  is,  Mr.  President,  that  the  security of  this  nation
—any  nation—in  this  uncertain  and  dangerous  world  is  safe-
guarded  not  by  any  single  factor  but  by  many  factors.   These
fall  into  two  general  categories:  First,  foreign  policies,  which
act   to   reduce   the   dangers   which  confront   us   abroad;   and
second,  the  total  capacity  of  the  Nation   for  defense.   These
categories  include  far  more  than  intelligence  operations  and
far,   far   more   than   any   single   intelligence  operation   such
as' the  U-2   program.
"It   is  in  terms  of  all  these  elements  that   any  reasonable
evaluation  of  the  U-2  program  must  be  made,  not  in  terms
of  the  specter  of  a  Pearl  Harbor  attack.    Even  as  an  intelli-
gence   operation,   we  must  weigh  the   risks  and   cost   of   the
U-2  flights  against  the  availability from  other  sources  of  the
kind  of  information  which  they   produced.
"Much  has  been  made  of   the   fact   that   the  U-2  flights
obtained   data   on  the   location   of  Russian  missile  sites,   sub-
marine   bases,   and   nuclear   centers.     But   to   illustrate   that
there  are  sources  of  information  other  than  U-2  reconnaissance
flights,   even   on   such   significant  matters,  even   on   countries
which  make  a  fetish  of  secrecy,  I  call  to  the  attention  of  the
Senate   an  article   from   the  magazine   Missiles   and   Rockets.
It   lists  and   pinpoints  on  a  map   10  Soviet   ICBM  sites  and
30  IRBM   sites  which   were   located   from   public   sources   in
Europe  and   from   technical   journals.     I  also  call  the   atten-
tion  of  the  Senate  to  an  article  written  by  Harrison   Salisbury
in  the  New   York   Times  September   30,  1954,   and  an  article
in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic Scientists,  October  1959,  written
by  Arnold  Kranish.    These  articles  reveal  a  great  deal   about
certain   Soviet   atomic   centers,   and   contain   information   on
them  which  no  aerial  photography   could   possibly  supply.    I
call   to  the  attention   of  the   Senate,   'Jane's  Fighting  Snips',
which  lists,  with  photographs,  submarines  of  the  Soviet  Navy.
Finally,  I  refer   the  Senate  to  the  book   'The   Soviet   Navy'
edited  by  Commander  G.  M.  Saunders.    On  pages  161-63
there  is  a  detailed  table  of  the  location  and  capacity  of  ship-
Spy-A-Week  Flights  Over  Russia?
"It  is  important  that  reconnaissance  over  Soviet  Rus-
sia  be  resumed  and  that  it  be  conducted continuously  so
that  the  picture  of  one  week  can  be  matched  against  the
pictures  of  another  week."
—"The   U-3  Must   Fly  Again,"  intervieiv  with  anon-
ymous  official,    U.S.  News  and  World  Report,   June   27.
"I  feel  impelled  to  take note  of  a  point  of  view  which
is   beginning  to   be  heard  to   the   effect   that   th€i   U-2
flights  must  be  resumed  and  that  it  was  a  great  mis-
take  ever  to  stop  them.   This  is  most  clearly  expressed
in  an  interview  in  the  June  27  issue  of  U.S.  News  and
World  Report  with  an  anonymous source  said  to  repre-
sent  'the  viewpoint  of  important  groups  of   officials   in
the  military  services  of  this  country and  in  the  Depart-
ment  of  State.'  .  .  .  Short  of  the  madness  of  preventive
war,   I  can   think   of  nothing  more  dangerous  than   to
resume  overflights of  the  Soviet  Union."
—Fulbright  Senate  speech  on Summit, June  28.
yards  throughout  the  Soviet  Union,  specializing in  naval  work.
"Mr.  President,  I  do  not  wish  to  leave  the  impression   that
I   believe  these   publications   are   the   equivalent   in   military
value  of  the  aerial  films  of  Russia  produced   by  the  U-2  pro-
gram.    In   some  respects  they  may  be  more   complete,   more
valuable;  and  in  others  less  complete,  less  valuable.   All  I  am
trying  to  suggest  is that  while obviously  we  cannot  ignore  the
importance  of  secret   intelligence   operations,   we  must   recog-
nize  equally that  they  are  not  the  only  source  and  the)'  are  not
necessarily  always  the  best  source  of  information.
The  Full  Cost  of  the  Operation
"On   the   basis  of  the   public  record   we  know   that   these
flights  produced  information.    We  know  that  they  produced
this  information  at  an  enormous  cost.    And  it  is  only  in  an
information-to-cost  ratio  that  they  can  be  properly   evaluated.
I  am  talking  now  not  of  the  monetary  cost  but  of  the  full  cost
in   terms   of   the   total   pattern   of   the   foreign   and    defense
policies  by  which  we  seek  to  safeguard   our   security.
"First,  the  collapse  of  the  summit.    Second,  the   intensifica-
tion  of  anti-American sentiment,  the  cancellation  of  the  Presi-
dent's  visit,  and  the  sprouting  of  the  seeds  of  deep  opposition
in  Japan  to the  Japanese-U.S.  Security Treaty.  Third,  the  shock
at  home  and  in  many friendly  nations  that  we  were  engaged  in
activities  which,  theretofore,  many  tended   to  associate  almost
wholly  with  Soviet  behavior.     Fourth,   the  embarrassment   of
certain  nations  allied  with  us  and  the  institution  by  them  of
more  stringent  controls  over  our  use  of  their  defense  faciKties.
"Fifth,  the  intensification of  the  threat  of  war  by  accident
or  miscalculation,  growing  out  of  the  order  to  Soviet  military
authorities  to  rocket  the  bases  from  which  unauthorized   planes
might  intrude.   Sixth,  the  strengthening   of  the  hand  of  hard-
line  Communists  within  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  Communist
bloc,  notably  the  Chinese  Communists,  against  those  in   Com-
munist  countries  who  might  believe  it  possible  to  live  at  least
without  military conflict,  if  not  harmony  with  us,  on  this  globe
grown  so  small.   Seventh,  the  partial  resumption   of  the  cold
war,   rendering   more   difficult   rational   negotiation.    Eighth,
pressure  on  Congress  for  increased   defense   spending.
—Mansfield    (D.  Mont)   US.  Senate,  June  23    (Abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  4, 1960
Stewart  Joins  Liberal  Bloc  to  Widen  Safeguards  Against  Illegally  Seized   Evidence
No  Danger  to  Negro  Sit-Downers  Seen  in  Golf  Links  Decision
Four  cases  in  the  field  of  civil  liberties and  racial  equality
were  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court  last  Monday  at  its  con-
cluding  session of  the  term.
One   of   them,   Wolje    v.  North   Carolina,  has  we   believe
been  wrongly  interpreted  by  some  newspapers  as  foreshadow-
ing   unfavorable  outcomes   in   future   appeals   from   criminal
trespass  convictions  imposed  on  Negro sit-downers.
The  circumstances of  the  North  Carolina  appeal,  however,
are  of  so  unusual  a  character we  do  not  believe they  will  con-
stitute  a  precedent  for  sit-downs generally.   The   case  really
pivoted  on  the  failure  of  counsel  for  the  Negroes—through
what  they called  "a  quirk of  inadvertence"—  to  include a cru-
cial  part  of  the  trial  transcript  in  the  record  on  appeal.
Six   Negroes    had   been   convicted   by   a   jury   of   criminal
trespass  on  the  Greensboro,  N.  C,  municipal  golf  links  and
sentenced  to  15  days  in  jail  even  though   the  Federal  courts
had  already granted  them  an  injunction  against the  barring of
Negroes  from  those  links.   The  trial, judge  refused  to  permit
the Federal  order  and  findings  to  be submitted in  evidence  but
counsel   neglected   to   include  that   in  the   record   on   appeal.
After  argument  in  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court,  the  State  fur-
nished  a  complete  transcript  showing  the  omitted  proffer  and
ruling.    Warren,   Black,   Douglas   and   Brennan   dissenting
thought  the  case  should  have  been  remanded  on  the  basis  of
this  transcript or  the  State  law  decided  by the  Supreme  Court.
A  Jehovah's  Witness  C.  0.
The  same four  dissenters  also  tried  to  temper  law  with  jus-
tice  in  the  case of  Raymond Gonzales,  Jr.,  a  Jehovah's  Witness
conscientious  objector  sentenced  to  18  months  in  jail  for  re-
fusal   to  be  inducted  into  the  armed   services.    Despite  two
favorable  FBI  reports,  the  Chief  of  the  Conscientious  Objec-
tor  Section  of  the  Justice  Department   seized  on  one  item  in
his  file  to  rule   against  his  veracity.   The   dissenters  argued
that  Mr.  Gonzales  was  denied  a  full  and  fair  hearing  because
he  never  had  a  chance orally  to  rebut  this  unfavorable  ruling.
Mr.  Justice  Clark  who  handed  down  two  decisions  friendly
to    Jehovah's    Witnesses    conscientious    objectors   in    1955
(Sicurella   and   another   Gonzales)   here   ruled   against  them,
perhaps  because at  trial  the  appellant  asked  to  see  the  original
Footnote  on Rockwell and Eichman
We  believe  the  agitation  in  New  York  City  against  a
speaking  permit  for  the  neo-Nazi  Rockwell  is  disgrace-
ful   folly.    It   was   not   liberty   which   gave   Hitler   his
chance   in  Germany,  but  lack  of  firm  attachment   to   its
principles.   We  who  have  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  grow-
ing  up  in  a  free  country  should  have  more  pride  in  its
traditions   and   more   faith   in   our   fellow    countrymen
than  to  run  hysterically  away  from  our  beliefs  because
some  crackpot  is  about  to   speak.
As  for  the  monster  Eichman,  Argentina  would  have  a
better  case  if  it  came  into  court  with  cleaner  hands.   It
has  made  no  effort  to  find  and  punish  the  many  Nazi
criminals  who  have  made  Argentina  their  refuge.  Mario
Amadeo,  its  spokesman  at  the  UN,  is  a  man  whom  our
government  identified in  a  1946  State  Department  book-
let  as  a  Nazi  sympathizer  and  a  "trusted  agent"  of  the
German  security  police.   Argentine  hypocrisy   is  so  nau-
seating  it  obscures  the  real  issues.
Intelligence  Trade  Item
Mr.  Jules  SOURWINE  [committee  counsel]:  What  is
the  attitude  of  the  Polish  intelligence   services   toward
the  use  of  Communist  Party   members  in  the   U.S.?
Mr.  Pawel  MONAT   [Polish  intelligence   officer   who
defected  to  the  West]:  The  MA's  [Military  Attache's]
office  does  not  have  any  official  contact  with  the  Com-
munist   Party   of  the   U.S.    Furthermore,   there  are  no
special  orders  issued  to  Z-ll   [Polish  Military   Intelli-
gence]  representatives    here  to  use  Party   members   as
agents.   There  are  two  reasons  for  this  policy:  first,  to
avoid  compromising  the  Communist  Party;  second,   Z-ll
feels  that  more  than  half  of  the  CP-USA  members  are
working  with  the  FBI."
—Soviet  Espionage  Through  Poland,  Senate  Internal
Security   Committee,   exec.  session,  released  June  84.
FBI  reports,   a  point  on  which  the  Justice  is  sensitive.
In  two  other  related  cases,  the  four  liberal  dissenters  won
Mr.  Justice  Stewart  to  their  side  and  reversed  a  rule  of  evi-
dence  which  has  been  law  since   1914.    The   rule   was  that
while  evidence  obtained  through  unlawful  search  and  seizure
by  Federal  officers  could  not  be  used  in  a  Federal  prosecution,
evidence   illegally   seized   by  State   officers   could   be  used   in
Federal  courts  if  the  seizure  was  made  without  the   participa-
tion   of   Federal   officers.
In  the  Rios  and  Elkins  cases,  Mr.  Justice  Stewart  now  holds
that   evidence   obtained   by  State   officials   in  violation   of   the
Fourth   amendment  is  equally  inadmissible  in  Federal  trials.
"The    Constitution   is  flouted   equally   in   either   case,"   Mr.
Justice  Stewart  declared  in  Elkins.   "To  the  victim  it  matters
not   whether   his   constitutional   right   has   been   invaded   by
a  Federal   agent   or  by  a  State  officer."
Some Ironic  Angles
For   aficianattoes   of   the  Supreme   Court,   some  fine  points
of  irony  may  be  noted.    One  is  that  while  Mr.  Justice   Frank-
furter   dissenting   (with   Clark,   Harlan,   and  Whittaker)   in-
voked   the   hallowed   names   of   Holmes   and   Brandeis   who
had   joined   in   the   earlier   rulings   allowing    admission    of
illegally  seized  State  evidence,  the  new liberal  majority  upheld
a  view  advanced  by  Mr.  Justice  Prettyman  in  the   Court   of
Appeals   for   the  District   of   Columbia,   no  civil    libertarian.
Mr.   Justice  Prettyman  had   ruled   that   the   earlier   line  of
cases,  which  began  with  Weeks,  when  taken  in   consideration
with   the   newer   case  of   Wolf    v.   Colorado,  "make  all   evi-
dence  obtained  by  unconstitutional   search  and   seizure  unac-
ceptable   in   Federal   courts."     The   final   irony   is   that   the
Wolf   decision   in   1949   was  written   by  Mr.   Justice    Frank-
furter.   This  held   that   the   Federal   Constitution,    by   virtue
of   the   Fourteenth   amendment,   also   prohibits    unreasonable
search  and  seizure  by  State   officers.
Mr.   Justice  Frankfurter  in   his  dissent   last   Monday   sug-
gested   a   compromise   whereby   evidence   illegally   seized   by
State  officers  would  be  inadmissible  in  Federal  courts  if  they
were   officers   of   States  which   exclude   such   evidence;   about
half   of   them  do.    The   other   dissenters,   however,  did   not
agree  with  him.   The  new  rule  seems  to  us  better  law  since
the   older   rule  invited   collusion  between  Federal  and   State
officers  to  circumvent   constitutional  guarantees.
1   o   s
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July   It, 1960
Liberal  Senators   Afraid  to  Vote  Against  the  Japanese   Treaty
(Continued   from    Page    One)
than  to  use  them  while  we  can  as  bargaining  counters  because
this  might   really  ensure  disarmament.
Much  to  Learn  from  Ike's  Trip
If   negotiation    resumes   and   world    tension   abates,    as   I
still  believe   it  will,  how  we  disentangle   ourselves   from  our
bases  will   become  a  No.   1  problem   of  our   foreign   policy.
It  is  here  that  the  President's   Far  Eastern  trip  could   prove
instructive,  though   not  in  the  inane  moral  he  himself   drew
in   that   feeble   TV   speech   Monday   night,   "We   must   not
fall  into  the  error   of  blaming   ourselves  for  what   the   Com-
munists   do."     The   points   which   should   not   be   overlooked
is  that   (1)    his  warm  welcome   in  the  Philippines   was  due
in  part  to  anti-Japanese  feeling,  (2)   the  very  real  enthusiasm
shown   in   Korea   was  a   reflection  of   popular   gratitude  that
there,  as  in  Turkey,   our  military  had   not   interfered  against
a  popular   revolution,  (3)   his  unpleasant  experience  in  Oki-
nawa   was  due   to   Japanese   nationalism   on   the   island   and
(4)    the  trip  to  Japan  had  to  be  called   off  because  the  one
issue  on  which  Japan's  Left  commands  support  in  all  sectors
of   it's  people   is  the   fear  that   U.S.   bases   may   draw   Japan
into  nuclear  war.    In  Korea  we  won  friendship  by  allowing
the  popular   forces  to  have  their  way.   A  wise  and  principled
democratic   foreign   policy  similarly  dictated   that   we   should
have   postponed    ratification   until   after   a   new   election  had
shown   whether   the   Japanese  really  want  our   bases   or  not.
From   this  vantage   point   the   bleakest   event   of   the   past
fortnight  was  the  ratification  of  the  Japanese  treaty  by  a  lop-
sided  vote  of  90  to  2,  the  two  being  Russell  of  Georgia   and
Long  of  Louisiana,  who  resented  the  provisions  which  make
the  treaty  less  onerous   for   the   Japanese.    Fulbright   in  pre-
senting   the   treaty   spoke   of   Japanese   fears   "that   the   war-
renouncing  article of  the  Japanese  Constitution will eventually
disappear  in  the  face  of  a  revived  militarism."   Morse  made
an   able   speech    (see   box   on   page    1)    against   the   treaty.
Gruening  expressed  misgivings  and  Humphrey   said  it  would
have  been  wiser  to  wait  until  after  the  elections.    But  these
few   thoughtful   voices   were   drowned   out   by  such    nonsense
What  We Are  Led to Forget
"Either  we  have  got   to  resign   ourselves  to  the  in-
evitability  of  war,  or  we  have  got  to  get  along   some-
how  with  the  Soviet  Union.  .  .  .  Suppose,  Mr.  President,
that  the  U-2  incident  had  occurred  the  other  way  round.
Suppose  a  Russian  counterpart  of   the   U-2   had  come
down  over  Kansas  City  on  May  1.  This  event  in  itself,
I  dare  say,  would  have  brought  speeches   in  the  Senate
powerful  enough  to  rock  the  Capitol Dome  with  denun-
ciations  of  the  perfidy  of  the  Soviets  on  the  eve  of  the
Summit  Conference  and  with  demands  that  the   Presi-
dent  not  go  to  Paris."
—Fulbright  on the  U-2,  U.S.  Senate  June  28.
as  Keating's  call  for   ratification   to  show   "that   we,  at   least,
are  not  to  be  intimidated  by  Communist  machinations,"   and
none  of  the  wiser  Senators  dared  vote  against  the  treaty   lest
they   seem   to   be   linked  with   Communist   mobs   in   Tokyo.
No   one  expected   the  lessons  of  the  U-2  to  have  an   impact
on   the   incompetent   Eisenhower,   but   the   vote   showed    that
he  could  make  the  Senate  rubber  stamp  his  mistakes.
The  Pull  of  A  Mindless Machine
The  U-2  report  by the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,
weak  as  it was,  yet lined  up  such  Republicans  as   Hickenlooper,
Aiken,  Carlson  and  Williams  in  some  criticism of  Eisenhower
quite  remarkable  in  an  election  year.   The  magnificent  speech
in  the  Senate June  23  by  Mansfield  of  Montana   (see   excerpts
on   page   two)   and   the   brilliant   and   statesmanlike  address
by  Fulbright  on  June  28  showed   how  much  further  leading
Democrats   on  the  committee  were  prepared   to  go  and   how
deeply  they  saw  into  the  background   of  the  U-2  affair.    But
though   both  saw  the   close  link  between   the  U-2  affair   and
the   Japanese  demonstrations,  they  too   voted  for  ratification.
It   is  as  if  the   mechanisms  of   free  government   still  operate
enough   to   allow   fairly   adequate   postmortems   of    mistakes
after   they  are   made,   but   not   enough   to   prevent   the:  chain
reactions  these  mistakes  set  off.    It  is  as  if  the  sheer  weight
of  the  military  machine  is  so  powerful  that  we  are  all   drawn
along   in   its   mindless  wake,   and   those   who   really   try   to
oppose  it  find  themselves  beyond  the  pale  of  practical  politics.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   .......................................................................................
Why  Not  Start  A  Gift   Sub  With  This  Issue?
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Street
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
7/4/60
Enter  gift  sub for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zon«............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tes  D    No  Q
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.     Entered   as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,   D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every   Thursday   except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  WilS  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washinftton  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly    published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.     Subscription •
^                 $S  in  the   U.  S.:  $6  in  Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates,"  $15  to  Europe;   $1'0  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED