I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960nov07.pdf

============================================================

Who's  Filibustering at  Geneva? P.  3
Calling  for  A  National Conference  in  December to  End  Minority  Rule  of  Congress,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VIII,  NO.  40
NOVEMBER  7,   1960
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Why  We  Cannot  Recommend  Either   Candidate
Speaking  of  prestige,   as  Kennedy  does  daily,  U.S.  prestige
has  hardly  been  advanced  by  the  character  of  the  campaign.
The  American two party system never looked  more  monolithic;
it  has  often  been   as  difficult   to  distinguish   the   real   differ-
ences   between   the   two  parties  as   it   is  to   choose   between
Ivory  and  Sweetheart  soap.    The  phoney  smell  of  advertis-
ing  copy  has  hung  over  the  prepared  scripts,  and  there  have
been  times  when  it  seemed  to  be  a  beauty  contest.    Kennedy
is  prettier  than  Nixon  but  Lodge  is  handsomer   than  Johnson
while  Jackie  clearly has  it  all  over  Pat;  this  election  is  as  apt
to  be  decided  by  a  hair-do as  by  a  hair.
What  Really  Hurts  Our  Prestige
Perhaps  the  most  distasteful   aspect  of   the  campaign   has
been   the   constant  yack,   and   daily   leaks   of   secret   reports,
about  U.S.  prestige;  our  country  has  been  made  to  resemble
a  fat  lady  constantly watching  herself  on  the  bathroom  scales.
Ours   is  a  great   country  with   great   traditions,   temporarily
fallen   under   mediocre  leadership;   prestige   is  not   acquired
by  constantly   reprimping  ourselves  in  the  mirror  of  public
opinion.    Those  who  have  seen  the  grimy  gloom  and flavored
the  leaden  intellectual  atmosphere  of  the  Soviet  Union  know
that  this  talk  of  our  being  secondary  is  premature  to  say  the
least.    What  really  hurts  U.S.  prestige   in  Western   Europe
and   the   uncommitted   countries   more   than   sputnik   is   the
inability   of   their   leaders   to   talk   sense   with   Americans.
Whereas   they   are   dealing   with   real   problems   in   a   real
world,  Americans  tend  to  live  in  a  nightmarish  realm  where
the  one  problem  is  to  evade  that  red  bogeyman  over  there—
can't  you  even  'see  him?—in  that  dark  corner.    Our   politics
have   but   two   primary   colors—white   or   red.     To   have  a
bright  young  man  like  Kennedy  lumping  together  situations
as  diverse  as  Ghana,  Guinea,  Laos  and  Cuba  has  not  helped
the  prestige  about  which  he  is  so  concerned.     How,   people
abroad  ask  themselves,  can  you  talk  sense  with  such hysterics?
Next  to  prestige,  the  most  important  word  in  the  Kennedy
campaign  has  been  growth.     But  it  is  evident  that  we  need
growth   in  our  ideas  more  than  in  our  economy.    How  can
we  fulfill   our  obligations  to  the  world,  how  can  we  utilize
the  leadership  our  wealth  and  strength  give  us,  if  our  stock
of   common   political   ideas   remains   so  meagre,   so   narrow
and  so  nationalistic?    Presidential   campaigns  are  not  merely
occasions  for  competition  in  pandering  to  vulgar   prejudices.
They  can  be  occasions  for  genuine  public  debate  and  educa-
tion.    _They  were  under  Wilson   and  Roosevelt.    Kennedy's
campaign   gives   one   the   impression   of   being   run   by  tech-
nicians who  repeat  key words  on  the  basis  of  decibel  response.
11                                                                                                       15
Why  the  Air  Force  Prefers  Kennedy
"Senator  Kennedy's  advisers  [on  defense]  have  been
chiefly,  though  not  exclusively,  associated  with  the  Air
Force,  which  has  advocated the  kind  of  sweeping  reor-
ganization   the  Senator  has  urged.    Indeed   it  would
appear  that   the  Air   Force  has   hitched  its   fortunes
to  the  hope  and  expectation  of  a  Democratic victory.
.  .  .  Senator  Kennedy   .  .  .  has  put  himself  on  the
side  of  the  military  'realists.'   His  election  would  seem
to  mean  major  changes  and  a  larger  defense  budget.
"Mr.    Nixon,  while   he  promises  to  maintain  U.   S.
military  primacy,  is   more  conservative  in  his   organ-
izational   and  budgetary  views.  .  .  .  Mr.  Nixon  says
that   'while  we  do  have  the  power  to  destroy  Russia
or  China  if  world  war  should start,  I  want  to  empha-
size  this  doesn't  mean  we  can  rest  on  our  laurels.'"
—Hanson  W.  Baldwin  in  New  York  Times  Nov.  S.
Of  the  two  candidates,  however,  Mr.  Nixon  is  clearly
better   at  mixing  metaphors.
Particularly   on   Cuba,   Kennedy   has  been   cheap,  demogogic
and   irresponsible.    How  can  he  make  sensible   policy   when
he  imprisons himself  in  advance  in  his  oversimplified  stereo-
types?
If  we  regarded  the  two  young  men  merely  as  functions  of
their  respective  parties,  then  it  would  seem  a  little  safer  to
return  the  Republicans  to  power;  they  are  more  cautious,  less
adventuristic,  not  as  eager  to  spend   on  the  arms  race,   and
unlike  the  Democrats  they  do  not  need  to  be twice as belliger-
ent  toward  Moscow  to  prove  they  are  not  secretly  Communist.
But  the  shallow  Nixon,  who  was  so  ready  for  war  over  Indo-
china  in   1954,   how  could  one  possibly  vote  for  him?    Yet
it  is  impossible   to  look  at  the  shopworn   collection  of   cold
warriors   whom   Kennedy   has   chosen   for   his   post-election
advisers  and  recommend  a  vote  for  him   either.
The  lessons  that  we  and  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth  must
learn   have  found   no  echo  in  this  campaign.    No   one  has
said  that  we  humans  must  become  one  family  or  perish.    No
one  has   said   that   we  Americans  for   our   own   good   must
realize  that  socialism  is  a  necessity  for  the  backward  regions
of   the  earth,  and  that  private  business  can  survive  only  by
working  with  the  trend.    No   one  has  said   that   the   arms
race  which  squanders  our   substance  is  a  crime  against   the
swarming  poor  on  this  planet.     And   neither   candidate,   in
this  country  which  talks  so  much  about  freedom,   has  empha-
sized  the  need  to  stop  its  steady  erosion  at  home,  to  slow  up
the   steam   rollers   of   conformity  which   continue   to   flatten
out  the  home  of  the  free  and  the  land  of  the  brave.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  7, 1960
Democratic  Reform  Promises  Can Be  Blocked by  Strategically  Placed Conservatives
Calling  for  A  National  Conference  to  End  Minority  Rule  of  Congress
Assuming  a  Kennedy  victory,  the  No.  1  political   task  on
the  home  front  is  reform  of  Congressional  procedures  to  end
minority  rule  of   Congress.     Otherwise  the   liberal   promises
of  the  Democratic  platform  can  again  be  frustrated  by  stra-
tegically   placed   Southern  conservatives.    It   would   be   wise
now  to  recall  the  disillusion  which  followed  the  liberal  vic-
tories   in   the   1958   Congressional  elections   when   the   new
men  proved  powerless  on  Capitol  Hill.    A  bitter  awakening
on  a  larger  scale  may  follow  a  Kennedy  victory  unless   pres-
sure  is  built  up  promptly  for  changes  in  the  rules.    It  will
be too late  if  liberals wait until  Congress  meets.    We  suggest:
Kennedy  and  Johnson  Still  Silent
(1)   That   in   the   closing   days  of   the   campaign   liberal
editors  and  reporters  try  to  smoke  out  Kennedy  and  Johnson.
Senator   Mansfield,  who   will   succeed   Johnson   as   majority
leader,  and  is  next, in  line  for  chairmanship  of  Senate  Rules
Committee,   has  already  indicated   (see   adjoining  box)   that
the  leadership  is not  taking  seriously  the  pledges  made  by  the
Democratic  platform.    Nixon  in  one  speech  made  a  friendly
gesture  to  the  House  Rules  Committee without  eliciting  any
protest   from    Kennedy.     Senators   Humphrey,   Clark   and
Douglas   recently  sent  Kennedy  a  wire  asking  him  to  make
clear,  where  he   stands  on   rules   reform   and   the   filibuster
and  serving  notice  that  they  will  introduce  a  measure  for  a
cut-off  by  majority  vote  after  reasonable  debate.    Neither  this
nor   a  similar  questionnaire  to  Kennedy  by  the   Leadership
Conference  on  Civil  Rights  has  yet  been  answered.
(2)   That  liberal  and  labor  organizations interested  in  civil
rights,  education,  housing,  depressed  areas,  and  other   social
reform   issues  hold  a  National   Conference  to  End  Minority
Rule  of  Congress  in  Washington   next  month.    The  purpose
would  be  to  focus  attention   on  the   rules   which   give  con-
servatives  control  of  both  houses.    An  excellent   introduction
to  the  subject  is  a  pamphlet   which  can  be  obtained   from
the   office   of  Senator  Joseph   S.  Clark   (D.   Pa.),  containing
the  texts  of  two  able  speeches  he  made  on  the  subject  last
summer  and   of  the  ten   bills  he  introduced   for   reforming
Platform  Pledges  Already Ignored
"In  order  that  the  will  of  the  American  people  may
be   expressed   upon  all  legislative   proposals,   we   urge
that   action  be   taken   at   the   beginning   of   the   87th
Congress  to  improve  Congressional  procedures  so  that
majority  rule  prevails  and  decisions  can  be  made  after
reasonable  debate  without being  blocked  by  a  majority
in  either  house.
"The    rules  of   the  House   of   Representatives   should
be  so  amended  as  to  make  sure  that  bills  reported  by
legislative  committees  reach  the  floor  for  consideration
without  undue  delay. ...  To  accomplish  these  (plat-
form)   goals  will  require  .  .  .  improved   Congressional
procedures   to   safeguard   majority   rule."
—From  the  1960 Platform   of  the  Democratic  Party.
Q.  Senator  Mansfield,  would  you  be  in  favor  of  abol-
ishing  filibustering  and  seniority  on  committees?
A.  I  would  not.    I  would  not.     In   the   first   place,
I  am  getting  a  little  seniority;  so  I  would  like  to  see
it  protected  and,  in  the  second  place,  I  think  we  would
have  to  recognize  that  there  may  be  other   questions
than   civil   rights,   such   as   water   resources  or   urban
development  or  things  of  that  sort  in  which, you  might
have   to  filibuster,  so   I   would  certainly   be  in   favor
of  maintaining  the  filibuster.
—Mansfield    (D.   Mont.),  Senate   majority   leader  if
the  Democrats  win,  on  Youth  Wants  to  Know,  Oct. 16.
the  rules  of  the  Senate.    These  would  end  not  only  the  fili-
buster  but  various  foot-dragging   procedures   resorted   to  by
recalcitrant  minorities.    In  addition  he  would  end   practices
which  enable  committee  chairmen  to  act  as  dictators  and  give
key   posts  on  conference  committees  to   members  hostile   to
the  majority  opinion  of  the  Houses   they  represent.     Such  a
National  Conference ought  also  to  press  for  reform  of  party
organization   in   the   Senate  which   gives   the   Southern   con-
servatives  control  of  the  steering  and  policy  committees,  and
leadership  machinery.:
Only  a  newly  elected  President  has  the  strength   to  lead  a
successful   onslaught   on   the   rules.     If   Kennedy   loses   the
South  'but  carries  the  election,  the  stage  would   be  set  most
favorably   for  success  in  this  crucial  area.
How  Two  House  Committees—Rules,  and  Ways  and  Means—Hamstring:  the  Senate
"It  must  be  noted  in  all  candor  that  we  in  the   Senate
have  legislated throughout the  present  session  in  the  shad-
ow,   not   on
1
;'  of   the   House   Rules  Committee  but   of   the
House  Ways  and  Means  Committee.    We  are  continually
being   told  by  our  leadership  .  .  .  that  we  should  neither
pass  nor  insist  on  the  liberal  legislation  we  believe  to  be
necessary   to   the  country's   well-being  because   the   House
Rules  Committee  will  not  permit  the  bill  to  go  to  confer-
ence  or,  if  taxes  are  involved,  the  House  Ways  and  Means
Committee   will   permit  needed   taxes   and   the   temporary
increased   ceiling   on   the   national   debt   to   expire   rather
than  yield  to  Senate  efforts  to  close  notorious  and  discred-
itable  loopholes.
"Thus   the  House  Rules  Committee  pickled  the "Senate-
passed  depressed  areas  bill  for  over  a  year;  and  when  the
House  liberals  finally,  with  the  assistance  of  the   Speaker,
got  their  less  adequate  bill  on  the  floor  and  through   the
House,   we   were   told  that   we  dare  not   change   as   much
as  a  syllable  of   the  House  bill—for  if   we  did  the   Rules
Committee   would  never   permit   the   proposed   legislation
to   go   to   conference.   .   .   Then   came   the   education   bill.
Again  we  were  told  we  dare  not  include  teachers'  salaries
in   the  coverage,  for  the  House  would  not  agree  and  the
Rules  Committee  would  block  a  conference. ...
"Next   came  civil  rights.    For  day  after  day,  and  night
after  night,  we  were  told  in  the  Senate  we  dare  not  pass
an   effective   civil   rights   bill,   for,   if   we   did,   the   House
Rules  Committee  would  pickle  the  legislation  for  the  rest
of  the  session;  .  .  .  Next   came  the  housing   bill.    I  was
told   that   if   I  pressed   the  public  housing   amendment   as
•I  had pressed  the  teachers'  salary  amendment  to  the  educa-
tion  bill,  the  House  Rules  Committee  would  find  a  way  to
kill   the   whole   housing   bill. ...
"It   seems  • clear   to   me   that   the   program   of   the   next
President  of  the  United  States  will  founder  on  the  rocks
of   House   Rules   Committee  opposition   unless   the   other
body  takes  steps  to  change  its  rules  and  procedures   before
the  87th  Congress  gets  down  to  business."
—Senator. Clark   (D.  Pa.)   in  the  Senate   .July   1.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  7, 1960
On  the  Main Issue  of  A  Test  Talk  Deadline,  However,  Kennedy  Much  Like  Nixon
Nixon's  "Secret  Soviet  Test"  So Phoney  Even  New  York  Times  Exposed  It
AEC  Chairman   McCone  hopes  to  be  Secreary  of   Defense
if  Nixon  is  elected:  McCone  is  a  rightist  Catholic  with  "holy
war"  views.   He  is  opposed  to  cessation  of  testing  and  began
leaking  hints  about  "secret"  nuclear  tests  in  the  Soviet   Union
months  ago  to  such  journalists  as  Joseph   Alsop.    McCone
inspired  Nixon's  claim  at  Toledo  that  a  new  seismic  station
at  Fort  Sill,  Okla.,  recorded  a  disturbance  in  the  Soviet  Union
which   "might   have  been   a   large   underground   nuclear   ex-
plosion."     Even  the  New   York   Times—usually   friendly   to
McCone's   views—two   days  later   (Oct.    28)    reported    that
Coast   and   Geodetic   Survey  and   the   Air   Force   Office   of
Technical   Applications,   which   is   responsible    for    detecting
nuclear  tests  in  the  Soviet  Union,  denied  Nixon's  story,  said
the  tremor was a  large  earthquake  in  the  Kamchatka  peninsula
off   Siberia.    The   Washington   Post  carried   the   same   story
from  the  same  official  sources  the  same  day.
No  Hurry  About  Improving  Detection
The   Fort   Sill   station   is  a   reminder   that   Pentagon   and
AEC  have  been  dragging  their  feet  not  only  in  the   negotia-
tions  at  Geneva  (see  box  below)   but  in  carrying  out  the   1958
East-West   technical   conference   recommendations   for   a   test
detection   network.     The   Fort   Sill   station,   recently   opened,
is  the  first  seismic  observatory  to  be  set  up  under  that  agree-
ment  more  than  two  years  ago.    Neither  Pentagon   nor  AEC
is  anxious  to  prove  long  distance  detection  and  identification
of   earth   shocks   possible   and   thus   smooth   the   way   for   a
treaty.    The  Nixon   affair   showed   that  through   our.existing
network   of   ordinary   earthquake   watching   stations   we   can
already  identify  and  locate  the  larger  shocks  at  vast  distances.
The  Kamchatka   quake  was  placed   at   58.4   degrees  N.   and
161.2   degrees   East  in  the  northern   part   of  Kamchatka.    If
the  Geneva   talks  break   down   and  underground    testing   re-
A  Tantalizing  Revelation
"I  have  listened  to  some  Americans,  including  top-
ranking   military  leaders,   who   think   that   we  could
carry  out  a  secret  testing  program  if   we  wished  to,
but  I  am  sure  that  we  as  a  nation  would  never  coun-
tenance   such  a  suggestion   if   it   were  seriously   pro-
posed." *
—Nuclear   Policy   for    War   and   Peace,   by   former
AEC  Commissioner  Thomas  E.  Murray   (I960),  p.  113.
- Mr.  Murray  favors   resumption   of  testing  underground
and  in  outer  space.   Without   offering    any   evidence  he
writes,  "My   personal  opinion  is  that  within  the   last
year  the  Soviets  have  carried  out  underground  nuclear
tests  without  our  knowledge."    By  what  mystic  means
they   came   to   his   knowledge   is   not    explained.
* This  is  not  reassuring.    If  the  tests  were  secret,
they  would  never  be  publicly  "proposed".
sumes  on  both  sides,  we  will  see  swiftly  expanded    detection
machinery  and  new  means  of  long  distance  identification  and
location  even  for  small  shots.
On  the  main  issue  of  setting  a  deadline  for  the  Geneva
talks,  as  on  most  issues,  both  sides  are  close.    Nixon  trickily
spoke  of  an  80-day  deadline  to  February  1,  but  qualified  this
by  saying  we  would  then  resume  tests  only  for  peaceful  uses.
On  weapons  testing,  he  is  willing  to  wait  longer  but  not  an
"indefinite"  time.    Kennedy  is  for  "one  last  effort"  but  is  not
for  resuming  tests  "at  this  time."    Even  Senator   Humphrey,
far   more  knowledgeable  than   either,   is  still   for   a  June  1
deadline.    Only  Humphrey  has  called  attention  to  our  own
foot-dragging.      Otherwise   Nixon   and   Kennedy   alike   give
the  impression   that  delay  in  achieving  a  treaty  is  due  only
to  the  Russians.   Kennedy  seems  more  sincere  than  Nixon  in
wanting  a  test  ban,  but  on  the  record  there  is  not  much  to
choose  between   them.
Nixon's   Filibuster  Charge  and  February  Deadline As  Seen  From Geneva
"In  effect,   as   Mr.  Nixon  has   declared,   they   (the  Rus-
sians)   have  been  filibustering  against  Western   efforts   to
work  out  treaty  arrangements  that  would  provide  reason-
ably  effective  safeguards. ..."
—Washington   Star   editorial,   October  S8.
"His  (Nixon's)   verdict  that  the  Russians  are  'filibuster-
ing'  and  that  the  U.  S.  should  impose  some  kind  of  'time-
table'  for  winding up  the  (nuclear  test)  talks  seems  almost
totally   out   of   line   with   the   facts   as   they   appear   here
(in  Geneva).
"Fact  number, one  is  that  the  negotiation  is  still  making
progress.  . . .  While  the progress  may seem  exasperatingly
slow,  it  is  no  slower  than  that  of  other  successful   nego-
tiations,  including,  notably,  the Austrian  peace  treaty.  .  .  .
"Fact  number  two  is  that  if  anything  is  bogging  down
the   talks   at   this  stage,   it   is   not  the   Russians   but  the
American  elections.    Indeed  the  question  of  who  is  doing
the  filibustering  at  this   point  is  a  moot  one.    Since   the
departure   of   James   J.   Wadsworth,   the   chief   American
delegate,   for   the   United   Nations   last   month  there   has
been  a  very  noticeable let  down  in  the  momentum  supplied
to  the  conference  from  Washington.  .  .  .
"Even  before  this,  however,  the  question  of   obstruction-
ism   was  less  clear  than  American  delegation   spokesmen
would  like  it   to  appear.    There  have  been   very   serious
divisions  within the  administration. .  .  .  THERE  IS  EVEN
A    POWERFUL    GROUP    IN    WASHINGTON   WHICH
WOULD  CLEARLY  PREFER TO HAVE  NO  TREATY  AT
ALL   (emphasis   added—IFS).   .  .  .
"Thus  it  happens  that  a  number  of   vital  decisions  re-
garding  the  treaty  have  never  been  made.   On  the  question
of  nuclear  testing   in  outer  space,  for  example,  the  basic
criteria  for  a  test  ban  were  laid  down  by  the  U.  S.  and
accepted  by   the   Russians   in   July,   1959.    But   today,   15
months  later,  there  has  been  no  decision   forthcoming  on
the  question  and  no  guidance   given  to   the   Geneva  dele-
gation.
"In  the   opinion   of   some   highly   qualified  Westerners,
this  kind  of  foot-dragging  has  delayed  agreement  on  the
treaty  at  least   as   much  as  Russian  intransigence.   They
believe   that   today  any   serious   Western   proposals   would
be  met  at  least  halfway  by  the  Russian  delegation.   And
that,  if  the  U.  S.  had  resolved  its  own  doubts,   agreements
could  have  been  reached  long   ago.
"Against  this  background,  Mr.  Nixon's   judgments  .  .  .
will  cause  considerable  dismay  in  Geneva.   The  inescapable
conclusion  is  that  the  Vice President  (in  setting  a  February
1  deadline)  is   aligning   himself   more  closely   with   those
who  oppose  any   agreement."
—Crosby  S.  Noyes,  Foreign  Correspondent  of  the  Wash-
ington  Star,  from   Geneva,  same  day,  same   page.
1  6  i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  November  7, 1960
Progress  of  Radicalism  in  America
"At  one  point  in  his  speech,  [Rep.  Edwin  E.]   Willis
[D.  La.]  said  that  'the  Communist  cells  and  Commu-
nist-front  organizations' in  America  are  actually  head-
ed  by  undercover  FBI  agents."
—New  Orleans  Times-Picayune  quoted  in  the  Wash-
ington   Post,  "Post  Scrips,"   p.  2,  Oct.  SI.
Rep.  Willis  is  a  senior  membei-  of  House  Judiciary
and  Un-American Activities  Committees.    His  remark
may  reflect  FBI  boasting  to  these  committees.
On  the  Colonial Front:  Behind  the  Revolt  in  El  Salvador,  Mao's  Advice  to  Abbas
Now  West  As  Well  As  East  Growing  Hostile  to  UN  in  the  Congo
CONGO:  Now  the  Western   powers  are  turning   against
the  UN  operation  in  the  Congo.    Barren's  (Oct.   31)  carried
a  hostile  front  page  editorial  saying  "it  is  reported  that  the
world   agency,   naively   accepting   Lumumba's  word   that   he
would  seek  no  more  aid  from  the  Russians,  now  has  decided
to  restore  him  to  power."    At  Leopoldville   when  the   UN
troops   celebrated  the  15th  anniversary  of  the  UN,   "Ambas-
sadors  of  the  Western  powers   boycotted  the  ceremony  .  .  .
to  mark   their   displeasure   with   current   UN   policy   in   the
Congo"  (AP  in  New   York   Herald-Tribune,   Oct.   25).    In
an  editorial  Oct.   29  on  Hammarskjold's  request  to   Belgium
for   withdrawal   of  Belgian   military   and   civilian   personnel,
The  New   York   Times   said  nervously  "It   must  not   happen
again   "that   the   West   bows   to   UN   decisions,   as  Britain,
France  and  Israel  did  in  Egypt,  while  the  Soviet  defies  them
as  in  Hungary."    This  seems  to  imply  that  the  West  should
defy  the  UN,   too,  when  the  UN   does  not  do  its  bidding.
The   fact  is  that  the  African-Asian   neutrals  are  pressing   for
restoration  of  the  parliamentary  Kasavubu-Lumumba   regime,
the  legal  government  of  the  Congo.    The  Russians  are  dis-
pleased   because  Lumumba   is  being   pressed   to   promise   he
will  keep  the  cold  war  out  of  the  Congo  by not  taking  Soviet
aid  outside  the  framework  of  the  UN.     Thus  in  this  three-
sided  conflict   for   the  future  of   the   Congo,   East  and  West
are  both  discontented  with  Hammarskjold.
Castro  Blamed  As  Usual
EL  SALVADOR:   It  isn't  often  that  the  staid   Associated
Press  sounds  eloquently   radical.    Its  dispatch  from   El  Sal-
vador  on  the  overthrow  of  the  Lemus  dictatorship  said  this
"little  coffee-growing   country  had  been  seething  for  months
with   demands  for   social  and   economic  change.    The   great
majority  of  the  2l/
2
  million  people  are  impoverished   peasants
dominated  by  a  smaller  number  of  wealthy,  plantation  own-
ing  families."    The  AP  quoted  the  leader  of  the  rebel  junta
as   saying  Lemus  "harmed   the   cause   of   liberty   throughout
the   hemisphere"  by  "labelling  all  opposition  Communist   to
justify   his  iniquities."     (Washington    Star,  Oct.   27.)      But
within  a  few  days  Latin  American  experts  operating   out  of
the  State  Department  were  seeing   "pro-Castro   agitators"   in
the   revolt   against   Lemus,   and   picturing   him   as   "a   well-
meaning   conservative   harrassed   for   months   by    persistent
disorders."        (Virginia     Prewett     in    the    Scripps-Howard
Washington   Daily  News,  Oct.    31.)
ALGERIA:   Some   humane  anti-terrorist   advice   seems   to
have  been  given  Ferhat  Abbas,  leader  of  the  Algerian  rebels-'
when  he  met  recently  in  Peking  with  Mao  Tse-tung.     The?-
London  Observer   (Oct.   30)   carries  a  story  based  on  a   fuU
N
account  of  the  meeting  in  Action   (Sept.  28)   a  French   lang-
uage  weekly  published   in   Tunis.     Mao,   according   to   this  *
account,  promised  "full  and  unconditional  aid"  but  "lectured
Ferhat   Abbas  on  the   need   of   presuading   and   re-educating
people  opposed  to him"  saying that  the  Chinese  "never  killed
a   prisoner   in   their   eight-year   war   with   Japan.     Disloyal  "
Chinese  were  captured,  re-educated  and  liberated."
FOOTNOTE   ON   OUR   QUARREL  WITH   CUBA:   A
newly   released   report    (Economic   Aspects   of   Military  Pro-
curement   and  Supply    by  the   Congressional   Joint   Economic.
Committee)   finds   "waste   and   inefficiency"   in  our   "duplica-
tive  and  overlapping"   military  supply   system.    It   estimates
that   from   two  to  two  and  a  half   billion  dolkrs  could   be
saved  annually  by  "a  properly  organized  Defense   Department
logistic  system"  in  procurement   alone.    This   is  more   than
twice  the  total  value  of  all  U.S.  investments  in  Cuba,  which
is  about  $1  billion.
Reprints  of  Bertram!  Russell  Issue  Still  Available  for   Mass  Distribution  at  Only  $2  A  Hundred
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,   5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  aub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
11/7/00
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second   Class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  8,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  published  every  Thurs-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  G.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.  S.;   6  in
Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:   {16  to   Europe;    $20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED