I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960oct31.pdf

============================================================

Exclusive!
Bertrand  Russell  Tells  Why   British  Labor  Voted  to  Renounce  The  Bomb
By  Bertrand  Russell
We   cabled   Lord   Russell   last   week   to   ask   whether   he
would   be  willing   to   write   an   article   explaining   for    the
U.  S.  public  the  significance   and  background  of  the  British
Labor  Party's  majority   vote  for  unilateral  nuclear  disarma-
ment,   the   culmination   of   a   mass   campaign  in   which   the
SS-ycar   old  philosopher  played   a  leading  role.   We  are  hon-
ored   to   be  able   to   publish   his   inspiring   article   in   this
week's   issue.
The  majority  vote  in  favor  of  unilateralism  at  the  British
Labour   Party's   Scarborough  Conference  had   come   in   the
immediately  preceding  weeks  to  be  expected  by  those  who
were  in  the   know.    It  had  been,   however,  something  of   a
surprise  even  to  the  advocates  of  unilateralism to  find  that
their  propaganda  was  having  a  success  surpassing  all  they
had  ever  expected.
Various  considerations contributed  to  this  decision.  I think
__(Continued  on Page  Two)            _____
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  39
OCTOBER  31,  1960
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
What  Do  We  Do  In   Cuba  If  We  Win?
The  German  strategist,  Clausewitz,  in  a  famous  chestnut,
said   war   was  the   continuation   of   politics  by  other  means.
This  implies  that it  has  some rational  purpose beyond vengeful
or  vindictive  destruction.   It  is  time  we  asked  ourselves  just
what  is  the  goal  of  our  growing  war  on  Cuba.
Let  us  suppose  Fidel  Castro  were  to  surrender  tomorrow
and   tell   us,   "Do  what  you  will  with  my  country."    What
would  we do?    If  our  aim  is  free  elections, there is little  doubt
that  these would  be won  by Castro. But  few  are  naive enough,
after  the  long  cozy  years  of  our  partnership with  Batista,  to
believe  that  we   are   imposing  economic  sanctions  on   Cuba
and  encouraging  counter-revolutionary  preparations  in  order
to   force   free   elections.    The   sugar  companies  and   the   oil
companies  and  the  cattle  companies  want  their  property  back.
The  Bourbons  Couldn't  Do  It
And  this  is  where  we  had  better  do  a  little  thinking.    It
would  not  be  difficult  to  restore  certain kinds  of  U.S.  property
in  Cuba.    Indeed  much  of  it  had  been  "intervened"   rather
than  "expropriated"  to  facilitate  return  in  future  negotiations
with  the  U.S.    The  restoration  of  Sears, Roebuck or  the luxury
hotels or  even the  oil  refineries  is a comparatively simple  prob-
lem,  whether  by  a  military  victory  or  by  negotiation.    But  to
take  the  land away  from  the  peasantry and  give  it  back  to  the
sugar  companies is another  matter.  Even  if  Castro  surrendered
tomorrow, the  land  would  still be  in the  hands of  the  peasants,
and  once  peasants  get  the  land  they  till,  it  is  an  almost  im-
possible task  to  take  it  away from  them.    The  Bourbon  restor-
ation'was  never  able  to  do  it  in  France.    Even  Stalin,  ruthless
as  he  was,  had  to  wage  a  long  struggle  of  almost  civil  war
proportions  to  dispossess  the  peasants  and  collectivize  the  land
in   the  Soviet  Union.     I  cannot   think  of  a  single   instance
where  land  once  distributed  in  an  agrarian  reform  has  been
returned  to  its  feudal  or  capitalist  former  owners.
Let  us  not  confuse  Cuba  with  Guatemala.    In  Guatemala,
Arbenz  was  forced   to   resign   by  the   army  chiefs  after   we
bought   them   over   to   our   side.     Land  reform   had   hardly
begun  and  the  army  was  there  to  restore  "order."    But  in
Cuba  Castro  wisely  liquidated  both  the  Batista  army  and  the
Batista  police.    Since  then  he  has  given  arms  to  the  workers
and  the peasantry.   What  Castro  has done  for  the  Cuban  peas-
antry  can  never  be  undone,  and  we  will  incur  the  hatred  of
Strange  Advice  From  A  Free  Press
"Moreover,   what   Mr.  Kennedy   advocated  looks   to-
ward  doing   in   Cuba   what   the   Administration,   as   all
the  world  knows,  did  do  in  Guatemala.    The  only  dif-
ference  is  that  Mr.  Kennedy  very  unwisely  said  what
he   would   do   about   Cuba   in   the   future,   whereas  the
Eisenhower   Administration   has   been  boasting  about
what  it  did in  the  past in  Guatemala.    What  this  shows
is  that  neither  side  seems  to  have  learned  the  lesson,
so   flagrantly   illustrated  in  the   U-2   affair,   that  when
a   government  goes  into  the  political  black  market   it
must   keep  its   month  shut."
—Walter  Lippmann,  October 25.
"Senator   Kennedy   would  have   done  better  to  keep
quiet   .  .  .  for  we  are  now  probably   in   for  another
big  splashy  debate  involving  not  only  Cuba  but  Guate-
mala  and  the  activities  of  the  CIA,  and  a  lot  of  other
things  that  could  well  be  left  unsaid."
—James  Reston,  The  New  York  Times,  same  day.
"Perhaps  it  is  a  mistake  to  talk  about  such  matters
publicly."
—Washington  Post  editorial,  same  day.
all  Latin  America  and  risk  world  war  if  we  try  it.
A   new   regime   backed  by  the   U.S.   would   have  trouble
enough   undoing  other   Castro  reforms,  raising   rents   again,
increasing  electric  rates,  turning  schools   back  into  barracks,
and  beating  the  labor  unions  into  submission.    It  would  face
an  impossible  task  in  the  countryside.   The  mere  effort  would
require  measures  so  repressive  and  brutal  as  to  shame  forever
our  pretensions  to  being  a  champion  of  freedom.    The  best
we  can  do  is  to  obtain  compensation   for  the  land  and   the
restoration   of   those   properties   which   can  serve  the   Cuban
people  just  as well  under  private  ownership,  particularly  since
the  Cubans  just  don't  have  the  trained  cadres  to  run  a  totally
socialized  economy.    But  these  sensible  goals  could  best  be
reached  by  negotiation.     To  encourage  counter   revolutionary
forces  to  tear  Cuba  apart  by  civil  war  first  is  to  sow a  harvest
of  bitterness  which  would  make  any  reasonable  solution   un-
likely.   We  wish  those  two  running  for  President  would  stop
and  think  a  moment  about  this.    One  of  them  is  going  to
have  to  deal  with  it.    The  problem  is  not  being  made  easier
by  the  lynch  mob  spirit  both  are  whipping  up  against  Cuba
in  low  and  unscrupulous  competition.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October   31,  I960
Why  British Opinion Sees Nuclear War  More Rationally Than U.S.  or Soviet...
(Continued  from   Page  One)
the  fundamental motive  which  lent  urgency to  all  the  others
was  pacifist  sentiment.    By  this  I  do  not  mean  pacifist  con-
victions.    I  do  not  mean  a  fixed  belief  that  all  war  is wrong.
What  I  do  mean  is  a  vivid  realization  of  the  utter  horror  to
be expected  in a  nuclear  war.   Young people  would  like  to be
allowed  to  grow  up,  and  their  parents  sympathize with  this
wish.   Those  who  have  any hope  of  some human achievement
in  the  future—political,  intellectual,  artistic,  or  what  not—do
like to think of  our planet gone cold  and no longer  a supporter
of  life.    Nor   is  it  only  that  there  would  no  longer  be  any
creation   of   fresh   beauty  or   fresh   thought  or   fresh   ability.
It  is  also  that  all  that  man  has  created  hitherto  would  be
obliterated.    The  world  contains  music,  paintings,   sculpture,
architecture,  poetry,  which  make  every  reflective  person  value
what  the  human  race  has  achieved  in  spite  of  its  many  im-
perfections.    All  this,  even  if  not  destroyed  or  broken,  will
cease  along  with  the  instinctive  joy  of  life  when  there  are
no  human  beings  to  see  or  hear  or  feel.    I  think  that  such
sentiments  inclined  Britons  to  view  favorably   any  proposal
that  seems  likely  to  keep  Briton  out  of  war.
The  Role  of  National  Pride
But  why, you may ask,  do  such  thoughts  not  have a similar
effect  upon  American  and  Russian  opinion?    At  this  point,
national   pride   comes  in.     America  and   Russia  contest   the
empire  of  the  world,  and  each  feels  that  a  loss  of  prestige  to
its  own  side  is  a  loss  to  itself.    Britain,  having  become  a
satellite,  cannot  escape what  is  felt  to  be humiliation  either by
submission   to  America  or   by  concessions  to  Russia.    This
makes  Britain  more  ready  than  either  Russia  or  America  to
view  nuclear  dangers  rationally  and  not  through  a  mist  of
military  myths.   We  know  that  Russia  could  exterminate  the
whole population  of  Britain  in  an  hour  by the  use of,  at  most,
2%  of  the  Soviet stock of  H-bombs.   We  have reason  to think
that  this  could  be  done  without  bringing  on  a  war  between
Russia  and  America.    The  reasons  for  this  belief  have  been
set  forth,  for   instance,  by  Mr.  Herman  Kahn  in  an  article
entitled   "The   Feasibility  of  War  and  Deterrence"  originally
published   in   the   Stanford   Research   Institute   Journal   and
reprinted  with  some alterations  in  Vol.  11, No.  2, of Survival.
These   various  considerations  converge  in  suggesting   that
The  Christian  View
"Dr.   Matthews   said   yesterday   that   anybody   would
wholeheartedly    wish  to  ban  the  bomb  and  war   itself,
but   the  real  question   was  how  best  to  work  towards
this  end.     What   did  the  Christian  faith   suggest?
"Christians   were   involved  in  this  world   and  had   a
duty   towards   civilization.    It  was  only  too  clear  that
the   world   of  nations   had   not   so   far   been   radically
transformed   by  the  Christian  gospel.    It  was  still  to
a  large  extent  a  world   in  which   power   was  decisive.
"To  think  that  the   Sermon   on  the   Mount  could  be
directed   to  international  relations  was  misleading.   It
was  not   possible   for   a   nation   as   such   to   turn   the
other  cheek."
—London   Daily    Telegraph,   Oct.   17,  reporting    ser-
mon   by   Dr.   W.   R.   Matthews,   Dean   of   St.   Paul's,
preaching   against   unilateral   disarmament.
Britain   as  a  non-nuclear  neutral  would  be  safer  than  as  a
member  of  NATO  and,  in  addition  to  being  safer,  would
cease  to  be  an  accomplice in  the  unimaginable wickedness of
exterminating  the  human  race.   Moreover,  Britain would  not
merely  cease  to  be  an  accomplice.  All  negotiations since  1945
have  shown  that  East  and  West,  unaided,  are  incompetent  to
reach agreement.  If  such agreement as  the  world imperatively
needs  is to  be  arrived  at,  it  will have  to  be  through  the  assist-
ance  of   neutrals.    The   neutrals  can  suggest  impartial  com-
promises  on  vexed  questions  which  both  sides  could  accept
without  loss  of  face.    Britain, as  a  neutral,  could  have  influ-
ence  of  a  quite  different  order  from  that  which  is  due  to  the
power  to  threaten  extermination,  and  very  much greater than
that  which  is  derived  from  being  one  of  the  minor  Powers
of  NATO  or  than  that  which she  can  wield while committed
to  the  policies of  one  side.   Britain  can  no  longer  enjoy  the
imperialistic  pride  with  which   Rudyard  Kipling  intoxicated
us,  but  we  could,  if  neutral,  enjoy  a  saner  kind  of  pride  in
leading  nations  out  of  a blood-thirsty madness which is almost
incredible  to those who are not  obsessed with it.   The decision
to   advocate  unilateralism  for   Britain  is  made   less   difficult
than   it  would  otherwise  be  by  the   realization  that  Britain
adds  very  little  to  the  military  strength  of  NATO  and  could
leave  the  alliance without  causing  any  appreciable  change  in
the  balance  of  power.   Moreover,  abandonment of  NATO by
Britain  does not  appear  to  its  advocates a  surrender to  Russia
Pious  AEC  Member  Offers  "Evidence" of  Secret  Russian  Nuclear  Testing
From  time  to  time  AEC  Chairman   McCone  has  dropped
hints  that  the  Russians  were  secretly  conducting  nuclear
tests,  though  he  has  never  offered  any  evidence  to  support
these  poisonous  surmises.    On  Oct.  21,  however,  the  New
York   Times  ran  a  UPI  dispatch   from   Chicago  reporting
that  AEC  Commissioner  Dr.  Robert   E.  Wilson,  addressing
something   called   the   Second   National   Youth   Conference
on  the  Atom,  said  the  AEC  had  evidence  indicating   the
Russians  might  be  conducting   underground  nuclear  tests.
Our  curiosity  piqued,  we  obtained   the  full  text  from   the
AEC.    The   only   evidence   the   speech   offered   of   Russian
secret  testing  was  this  passage:  "There  have  been  recent
indications  of  some  explosions  in  Russia  which  they  have
tried  to  explain  as  unusually  large  shots  of  conventional
high  explosives.    No   explanation  has  been   offered,    how-
ever,  with  regard  to  their  claim  last  winter  of  having  just
developed  an  amazing  new  weapon.    If  that  was  a  nuclear
weapon,  as  seems  probable,  how  could  they  know   it   was
amazing  unless  they  had  tested  it?   Or  if  they  are  'turning
out  missiles  like  sausages'  as  Mr.  Khrushchov  said  at  the
United  Nations,  dare  we  assume  that  these  are  either  of
old  or  untested  designs?"    This  is  pretty  thin   stuff.
The  speech  was  a  plea  for  resuming  testing.    Dr.  Wilson
was   "confident"   that   "very   important"   improvements   in
nuclear   weapons   could  be  obtained   if   underground  testing
were   resumed,   although    admitting    regretfully    that    "the
improvement  to  be  expected  would  probably   not  be  of  the
magnitude  of  the  thousandfold  increase  in  destructive  power
achieved   by  the  development   of   the  original   A-bomb,   nor
of   the  second   thousandfold   increase  on  top  of  this  when
the  H-bomb  followed."     Dr.  Wilson   warned  the  youth   con-
ference   we  had  to  be  careful   because  we  were  up  against
a   potential    enemy   who   had   no   "religious   background."
We  hope  the  conference   ended  with  a  prayer   for  just  one
more  thousandfold   increase  so  we  could  really  be  sure  to
blow  everybody   to  Kingdom   Come.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   October  81, 1960
... Britain As A Neutral Out  of NATO  Can Exert Moral Leadership for  Peace
or  to  anybody  else.    It  appears  rather  as  a  determination  by
Britain  to take on a very arduous duty, the  duty of  conciliation.
Russia  and  America claim  the  right  to  exterminate,  not  only
each  other,  but  all  neutrals.    It  is clearly both  the  interest  and
the   duty   of   neutrals  to   resist   this  arrogant  claim  of  joint
power  of  life  and  death.    Britain,  if  neutral,  can  lead  this
resistance  and  thereby save the  world.
It   is,  of  course,  well  understood   by  those  who  advocate
unilateralism  for  Britain  that  nothing  done  by  Britain  alone
can  appreciably  diminish  the   danger   of  world  war.    That
danger  can  only  be  averted  by  agreements  to  which  Russia
and  America  are  parties.    But  British  unilateralists  are  per-
suaded  that  Britain  can  do  more  to  further   such  agreements
as  a  neutral,  and  perhaps  as  leader  of  a  neutral  bloc,  than  can
be  done  by  any  satellite  of  either  East  or  West.
They  Prefer  the  End  of  Man
Opponents   of   unilateralism  find  the   reasoned   cause   for
this  policy  totally unintelligible  and  therefore  tend  to  regard
it  as  the  work  of  fellow-travellers undertaken in  the  interests
of   Russia.    They  are  so  persuaded  of  their  own  rationality
and  of  their opponents'  irrationality that  they  fail  completely
to  come to  grips  with  the  rational  arguments for  British  neu-
trality.    Those  who  advocate  unilateralism, but  are  quite  ob-
viously  not  pro-Russian,  are  thought  to  be  weak  in  the  head,
since  it  is  apparently held  that  anyone  capable  of  thinking,
and  not  only  of  feeling,  must  prefer  the  end  of  Man  to  even
the  faintest  risk  of  Russian victory.   We  unilateralists,  on  the
contrary,  consider that  our  opponents,  so  far  from  being gov-
erned  by  the  head,  are  governed  by,  not  the  heart,  but  the
spleen   to  a  degree  that  makes  them  incapable  of  rational
judgment.
Perhaps  the  chief   importance  of  the  Labour  Party's  vote
at  Scarborough is  that  it  brings  into  the  domain  of  practical
politics what had  been, until now,  regarded  as  a  fad  of cranks
and  crack-pots.    The  trade-unionists who  have  brought  about
this  change  are  hard-headed  men  with  much  experience  both
in   administration  and   in  negotiation.    They  are  men   filled
with  common  sense  and  not  at  all  the  sort  of  people  to  be
carried  away  by a wave of  hysteria.   They  are  not  intellectuals.
Their  hair  is  not  long,  and  few  of  them  have  beards.   They
are  men  who  have  come  to  understand  the  urgent  necessity
of  avoiding war,  and  the  present  awful   imminence  of  war,
That  Free  New  England  Spirit
Burlington,   Vt.,   Oct.   19—Random   interviews    with
rank  and  file  voters  and  off-the-record  talks  with  lead-
ers  of  both  parties  indicate   that   Rep.  Win.  H.  Meyer,
the  first  Democrat   to  be  elected   to  the  Congress  from
Vermont  in  106  years,   is  in   trouble.
Two  years  ago  Mr. Meyer  campaigned  on  a  personal
platform  that  advocated  immediate  admission   of   Com-
munist  China  to  the  UN  and  bans  on  nuclear  testing
and  the  draft.
A  motel  operator  who  always  votes  Republican  said:
"I   wouldn't   call   him   a   radical,   exactly,   but   he   has
been  what  you  might  call  a  free  thinker  and  it's   kind
of   embarrassing    to  have   him   down  in   Washington."
—New   York   Times,  October   20.
either  accidental  or  intended.
It  is,  of  course,  true  that  emotion  is  what  lends  force  to
their  movement.    The  emotion  in  question  is  a  wish  for  the
survival  of  our  nation  and  our  species.    Never,  until   now,
has  this  wish  been  considered  base  or  cowardly.   Never,  until
now,  has  a  man  who  has  fought  for  his  country  been  thought
morally  inferior  to  one  who  was  willing  to  see  all  his  com-
patriots  dead.    And  it  is indubitably complete  national  extinc-
tion  which faces  Britons while  present  policies  continue.  Their
own  Government   has  informed   them  that,  in  the  event  of
war,  it  would  make  no  attempt  to  protect  civilians.    Protec-
tion  would  only  be  given  to  those  in  charge  of   launching
sites  in  the  hope  of  a  blood-thirsty  vengeance  after  all  other
inhabitants  of  Great  Britain had  perished.    It  is  scarcely  sur-
prising  that  such  a  policy  is  unattractive  to  those  who  do  not
enjoy  the  sweets  of  power.    What  is astonishing  is  that  there
is  a  single  person  in  the  whole  country  to  defend  such  an
insane  horror.    Only  persistent  misrepresentation  on  the  part
of  most  of  the  organs  of  publicity  can  explain  such  apathy  as
exists.     Every   person   awakened  to   the   horror   which   our
masters  are  deceitfully  preparing   for  us,  is  one  more  unit
added  to  a  force  which  is  rapidly  becoming  overwhelming  by
means  of  which  we  hope  power   may  at  last  fall   into   the
hands  of  men  not  totally  destitute  of  sanity  and  humanity.
It  is  this  hope  that  inspires  the  unilateralists  who  carried  the
day  at  Scarborough.    Before  long,  we  believe,  we  can  carry
the  day throughout  our own country, and,  in the  end,  through-
out  the  world.
Senator  Mansfield  Warns  Us  to  Prepare  for  Rising  Neutralism  in  Japan, Too
Senator  Mike Mansfield  (D.  Mont.),  in  a  report  on  Japan
to   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee,   notes   that
Japan  (along  with  the  U.  S.-Canada,  Western  Europe  and
the  Soviet  bloc)  is  again  one  -of  the  four   great    industrial
complexes  of  the  world,  with  a  rate  of  growth  higher   than
any   other—16  to   17  percent   in   1959.     Real   wages   have
increased   steadily;   per  capita   income   is   now  about   $300
a  year,  the  highest   in  Asia.    But  with  100  million   people
in  a  land  the  size  of  Montana,  Japan  must  export  to  live.
Economically,  Japan  must  become  less  dependent   on  the
U.  S.    In  the  6  years  1953-58,  she  had  a  $2  billion  adverse
balance  of  payments  with  the  U.  S.,  and had  to  earn  dollars
in  other  markets  to  balance  her  accounts.    Southeast  Asia
is   still   hostile   to  Japan   because  of   war-time    occupation.
India,   which   used   to   buy   Japanese   piece   goods,   is   now
making  her  own.    Japan  looks  again  to  the  mainland   mar-
kets   of   Korea   and   China.     Here   the   need   for   greater
economic   independence   from   the  U.   S.  and  the   cold   war
creates  a  need   for  greater   political   independence.
In  this  context   Senator   Mansfield   warns  us  to   expect
a  growing   neutralism   in  Japan,  and  to  "avoid  attitudes  of
shock  and  panic  reprisals"  when  Japan  resumes  trade  and
other  relations  with  China  and  the  Soviet  maritime  prov-
inces.    He  cautions  that  our  defense   treaty  is  "a  political
liability   within  Japan  and  a  source   of   irritation"  and  he
thinks   we   could   help   Japan   by   considering    the   idea   of
unifying   and  neutralizing    Korea   on  the   Austrian   model.
The   Mansfield   report   contains   a   cryptic   but   pregnant
observation.    It  says  Japanese   traditionalism   faces  a   con-
tinuous   decline   due  to   urbanization   "unless   it   is   again
diverted  into  a  new  militarism."    Either  we  allow   Japan
peacefully   to  renew   her  trade  with   China  on  a  neutralist
basis,  or  ally  ourselves  with  a  militarism   which  can  again
be  turned  against  us.
1  5 I
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  SI,  I960
Kennedy,  Like  Nixon,  Had  Trouble  in  Finding  Himself   The  Right  "Image"
Schlesinger's  Effort  to  Deny  Kennedy  and  Nixon  Both  "Cool  Cats"
The  purpose  of  Arthur   Schlesinger,  Jr.'s,  little   campaign
book,  "Kennedy  or  Nixon:  Does  It  Make  Any  Difference?"
is  to  disprove  the  view  that  both  candidates  are  a  couple  of
"cool  cats."    The  book  devastates  the  easily  devastated   Mr.
Nixon  but  it  doesn't  do  too  well  with  Senator  Kennedy.
At  one  point  we  are  reminded  that  Mr.  Nixon  once  called
Secretary  Benson  one  of  the  best  Secretaries  of  Agriculture  in
our  history  and  later  repudiated  him.   A  few  pages  on  we  are
told  that  Kennedy,  too, was  originally  for  Benson  and  then
switched  "either  because  J.  K.  Galbraith  and  other  economists
convinced  him  that  Benson  was  wrong  on  the  merits,  or  be-
cause  it  was  politically  disastrous  to  be  for   Benson."
Few  Issues  on  Which  to  Be Inconsistent
Prof.   Schlesinger   claims  Kennedy  has   otherwise   had   "a
consistent  record."    The  record,  more  closely  examined,  shows
that  Kennedy  like  Nixon  has  been  identified  with  few  issues
on  which  to  be  inconsistent.    Schlesinger  criticizes Nixon  for
this  but  when  he  tries   (at   pages  20-22)   to  contrast Ken-
nedy's  record,  it  is  revealing  how  few  issues  he  can  cite.
Kennedy  was not  associated  with  the  struggle  for  the  rights
of  colored  men—except  at  a  safe  distance,  in  Algeria;  Schles-
,  inger  calls  him   "an  unusually  active  member"   of   the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee  but  he  was  usually  active  else-
where;   Kennedy  was  conspicuous   by  his  absence  from   the
hearings  of  the  disarmament  subcommittee  of  which  he  was
the  most  inactive  member;  the  only  issue  with  which  he  iden-
tified  himself  strongly  was  that  of  labor  union  reform.
Schlesinger  says Nixon  has  no  real  "image,"  but  implicitly
admits   Kennedy   had   trouble   with   his   "image",  too.  He
writes,   "Once   Kennedy   resolved   the   -problem   of   his   own
identity,  his  own  emotions  were  liberated  for  an  increasingly
forceful  commitment  to  liberalism."    (Our italics.)
Even  then  this  was  not  "informed  by  intuition  and  enriched •
by  feeling"   but  was  "cerebral."    Isn't  this  a  fancy  way  of
saying  that  Kennedy  doesn't  feel  deeply  about  liberal  issues?
And  isn't  it  going  a  bit  far  to  go  on  and  say  that  Kennedy
will  be  the  most  "cerebral"   President  since  Wilson ?    There
is  no  real  comparison  between  the  scholar  Wilson  and  the  Ivy
Struggle  to  Save  the  Congo
From  Constitutional  Rule
".  .  .  U.  S. diplomats  .  .  .  are  'very  worried"   over
word  from   the  capital  at   Leopoldville  that  the  anti-
Communist  strongman,   Col.  Joseph  Mobutu,  is  losing
control  of  the  Congolese   government   .  .  .  Simultane-
ously,  Mr.  Lumumba's   chances   of  returning  to   power
appeared  to  improve.   The  UN  command  in  the   Congo
was  said  by  the  press  services  to  be  pressing  for  "a
return   to  legal  democratic  processes.'    That   presum-
ably  means  the  Congo's  parliament  should  begin  func-
tioning  again.    If   it   does,   many   diplomats   think   it
might   vote   the   persuasive   Mr.   Lumumba   back   into
power.  .  .  ..  Whether   Mr.  Hammarskjold  is  buckling
under   Soviet   demands   or  not, he  does   face   conflicting
pressure  from  the smaller  African  nations  (which)  . . .
want   some   sort  of  constitutional   rule  rather   than   a
military    regime.  .  .  .   Although   Secretary   Herter's
advisers  insist  they  are  keeping  hands  off Congo  events
.  .  .  U.  S.  diplomats   at   the  UN  conferred    several
times  last   week  with  Mr.  Hammarskjold   on  the sub-
ject.  .  .  What's  more,  U.  S.  diplomats   in   Leopoldville
have  conferred   often   recently   with  Col.  Mobutu   when
he   has  asked   for   advice."
—Wall  Street  Journal,  Oct. 24, from   Washington.
League  dilletante Kennedy.
Schlesinger  is  ludicrous at  one  point  in  his  effort  to  build
up  his  hero,  when  he  contrasts Nixon's  mawkish "Pat and  I"
exploitation  of  his  family with  Kennedy's  attitude.    "He  has
no  scruples  about  using  his   family   as  part   of   his   political
organization,"  Schlesinger  writes,  "but he  does  not  lug  them
into  his  serious  speeches."     It  would  be  fatal  to  his  chances
if  he  did,  particularly that  father  of his.
The  weakest point  in  the  book is  its discussion of  Kennedy's
attitude   on   McCarthyism   and   civil  liberties.     Here   Schles-
inger  admits  that  Kennedy lacks  the  "spontaneous  visceral  re-
actions"  of  the  liberal  but  argues  that  Kennedy unlike  Nixon
"never  has  been  obsessed  with  Communism  as  an  internal
threat."    Why  then,  did  he  join  Nixon  in  1950  in  voting  to
override  Truman's   veto   of   the   Internal  Security  Act, the
Mundt-Nixon  bill,  a  vote  Schlesinger  does  not  mention?
IPS  Speaks  8  P.M.  Nov. 4  Harvard  Liberal  Union  Special   Meeting   on  Cuba,  2  Divinity   Place,   Cambridge
I.  F.  Stone's
Please  renew <
Street  ..............
City    ...............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)    Name  ...
Street  .............
City   ...............
Shall  we  send
Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
........................Zone............State....................
10/31/80
for  $2 (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?         Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Spread  Lord  Russell's Message  —  Reprints  Only  2  Cents  Each  In  Bundles of  100  or More
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED