I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960may02.pdf

============================================================

The  Lesson  in  Rbee's Fall,  P.  4
Rep.   James  Roosevelt  Calls  on  the  House  to  Abolish  the  Un-American Committee,  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO. 17
MAY  2,  1960
101
     WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Another  "Little  Band  of  Wilful    Men"
Forty  years  ago  at  the  end   of  World  War   I  the   Senate
blocked   the   peace  treaty  which   would   have  put  the   United
States  into  the  League  of  Nations,  and  thereby  destroyed  one
hope  of  avoiding  World  War   II.   Today  another  "little  band
of  wilful   men",   in  Woodrow  Wilson's   bitter  phrase,  is  pre-
paring  to  block  the  two-thirds  vote  required  for  a  nuclear test
agreement,  and  thereby  destroy  one  hope  of  avoiding  World
War  III.   This  is the  perspective  in  which  to  see the  four days
of  hearings  with  which  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  En-
ergy  has  just  spread   pessimism  about  the  feasibility  of  a  test
agreement.
The   League  of  Nations   was  not  defeated  by  open  opposi-
tion.   Only  a  dozen  Senators  dared  oppose  the  League  openly.
The  League  was  defeated  by spreading confusion  and  disquiet,
by  advocating  so  many  additional  safeguards,  by  loading  the
treaty  with  so  many  reservations  that  Wilson  would  have  had
the  impossible  task  of  renegotiating  the  Covenant  if  the  mul-
tiply  amended  Treaty  had  been   ratified.   The  same  strategy  is
being  pursued  today  by  the  enemies  of  peace.   Their  Thermo-
pylae  is the  Joint  Committee.   They  claim only  to  want  a  fool-
proof   treaty.   But  for  them  this  means  100  percent assurance
not  only  against  the  known  realities but  against  any  and  every
lunatic  possibility of  concealment  dreamed  up  by  Mad   Hatter
scientists   like  Dr.   Teller,   and   amplified  by  such   incendiary
idiots  as  Hosmer  of  California   on  the  Joint   Committee.
The  Sinister  Uses  of  May  Day   Parades
We   offer  a  sample,  the  prize  exhibit  of  the  hearings.   Dr.
C.  E.  Violet  of  the  Lawrence  Radiation  Laboratory  was  on  the
stand,  and  talk  turned  to  the  "big  hole"  theory  of  concealment
with  which  Dr.  Teller  has  bedevilled  the  negotiations.   "As-
suming,"   Congressman   Hosmer   asked,   "that   you  could  drill
this  hole  from  the  inside of  a  building  or  something  from  the
middle  of  town,  and  blow  this  thing  off  in  the  middle  of  a
May  Day  parade,  you  would  not  have  much  chance  at  all  of
any  visible  manifestation  of  any  kind  would  you?"   to  which
Dr.   Violet  replied   accommodatingly,   "That  is  correct,  if  you
build  a  strong   enough  building."   The  Russians,  when   they
read  these  hearings,   must  think  us  whacky,
The  Same,  Careful  Objective Manner?
"These  hearings,"  Senator  Anderson,  chairman  of  the  Joint
Committee  said  in  announcing  them,  "will  be conducted  in  the
same  careful  objective  manner   as  the  hearings  held   by  Con-
gressman  Chet  Holifield  on  The  Nature  of  Radioactive  Fallout
and  Its  Effects  on  Man."    Since  Anderson  was  highly  dissatis-
fied with  those  hearings  last  year  and  stayed  away  from  these
new   ones,   one   wonders   whether   he   wrote   this   testimonial
tongue-in-cheek.    The  pattern  was  the  same.    It  was  to  give
5  *
Gallant   Concession
"I   should,   however,   like   to   make  one   point  quite
explicit.     If   you   want   to   be   optimistic,   and   if    you
want    to   believe   that   methods   of   detection   can   be
worked  out  so  that  tests  can  be  really  controlled  and
checked   and  policed,   I   dare   not   say   that  this   is   im-
possible.    Very   few  things  in  science  are  impossible."
—Dr.  Edward   Teller,  Holifield   Hearings,  March  20.
most  of  the  limelight to  those  who  speak  for  the  AEC  point  of
view,  relegating critics  to  panels  in  which  few  have  a  chance
to  express  themselves fully,  and  the  AEC  crowd  has  a  second
chance  at  bat.   The  hearings were  one-sided  in  three  respects.
The   first  was  in  division  of  time.   The  four  days  of   hearings
filled  677  pages  of  transcript  but  only  65  pages,  or  less  than
10  percent,  can  be  reckoned  as  giving  voice  to  critics  of   Dr.
Teller  and  proponents  of  a  treaty.   Even  this  is  an  overstate-
ment  since  it  includes  the  35  pages  of  the  one  panel  discussion
the  morning  of  the  third  day,  and  7  pages  of  these  35  were
filled  by  Dr.  Teller—after   saying,  "I   am  a  little  hesitant  to
talk!"   The  first  two  days of  the  hearings  the  Committee  heard
eight  witnesses  including  Dr.  Teller,  all  of  them  on  the  nega-
tive  side  except  the  last,  Dr.  Hans  Bethe.   He  did  not  take  the
stand  until  almost  4:30  p.m.  of  the  second  day  and  only  Holi-
field  as  chairman  stayed  to  hear  him.   Of   the   352  pages  of
testimony  the first two  days,  Dr.  Bethe's filled only the  final  25
or  about  7 percent  of  the  total.   The  only  other  time  Dr.  Bethe
and  his  supporters had  a  chance to  be  heard  was  on  the  panel
discussion  the  third  morning  and   even  here   they  were   out-
numbered,  and  out-talked.  Of  11 scientists on  the  panel,  only
four  were  supporters of  Dr.  Bethe  and  only  one,  Dr.  Richard
Roberts  of   Carnegie  Institution,  had   a  chance  really  to  ex-
pound  his  point  of  view  (see  box,  page   2).
An  Earlier  Test  Ban  Would  Have  Helped  Us
The  hearings  were  also  rigged  by  their  frame  of  reference.
Holifield  insisted  from  the  outset  that  discussion  be  limited  to
technical  questions   of   detection   and   concealment,  though—
characteristically—this  was  not  applied  to  Dr.  Teller  who  was
allowed  to  argue  his  familiar  theme:  the need  for  cleaner,  more
flexible  and  discriminating tactical  weapons.   Dr.   Bethe  did
not  have  a  chance  to  say  to  the  Committee   what  he  did   last
Monday  night  in  a  speech   to  the  Washington    Philosophical
Society.   Dr.  Bethe  said  (1)   we  already  had  tactical   weapons
in  many  sizes,  shapes   and  weights   down  to  fractions  of   one
kiloton   and   (2)    that   if   testing   resumes   the   Russians   were
more  likely  to  concentrate  on  catching  up  to  us  in  those   large
strategic  thermonuclear  weapons   that  threaten   our   homeland.
(Continued   on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 2,1960
(Continued   from   Page  One)
"It  may  be  hard  to  judge  the  future,"  Dr.  Bethe  said  in  that
speech,  "but  it  is  easy  to  judge  the  past.   In  1955  the  Russians
wanted  to  stop  testing  in  1956.   They  only  had  one  H-bomb
then;  we  had  half  a  dozen.   If  we  had  accepted  their  offer  to
stop  testing  then,  they  would  not  have  ICBM  warheads  and
we would  not  need  to  fear  the  missile  gap."
The  Hobgoblin  of  Cheating
By  limiting  the  discussion  to  the  technicalities  of  detection,
the  Joint  Committee  made  it  impossible  to  weigh  the  risks of
a  continued  arms  race  against  the  risks  of  cheating.    Cheating
itself  was  treated  as  a  technological  question.   This,  under  the
circumstances  of  these  hearings,  produced  prefabricated alarm-
ist  headlines since  no  inspection  system  can  be  foolproof   and
there  is  no  way  to  disprove  the  negative   proposition   that  a
violator   might   succeed   in   eluding   surveillance.    Dr.   Bethe
pointed  out  in  his  Monday  night  speech  that  if  the  Russians
were  as  anxious  to  develop  small  tactical  weapons  as the  Tell-
erites  imply,  they  could  do  so  with  much  less  effort  and  with
no  risk  of  being  branded  as  a  treaty-violator  by  accepting  our
proposal  to  ban  tests  only  above  the  20  kiloton  level.   No  one
dared   argue   before  the   Joint   Committee   that   it   would   be
absurd  for  the  suspicious  Russians to  pay  the  price  of  allowing
foreign  installations and  inspectors  on  their  soil  and  then  risk
cheating.  Nor  could  anyone mention  that  we  and  the Russians
had  a  common  interest  in  slowing  down  the  arms  race  and  the
spread  of  nuclear  weapons,   an  interest  far  outweighing  any-
thing  which  could  be gained  by secret  testing.   The  most  strik-
ing  omission  was  any  testimony on  the  feasibility  of  shielding
from  normal  intelligence  operations  the  enormous  excavation
jobs  lasting  two  to  three  years  for  the  "big   holes"  and  the
problem  of  how  to  hide  the  year  long  pumping  operations  re-
quired  to  empty  the  huge  amounts  of  brine  which  must  be
flushed  from  salt  domes  if  they  are  to  be  used  for  secret  tests.
Such  operations  are  easily  spotted,   as  CIA  sources  have  ad-
mitted  to  private  Congressional  inquiry.
The  hearings  were  rigged  in  another  respect,  and  this  was
by  the  obvious  preconceptions  of  the  Joint  Committee   mem-
bers.    Senators  Gore,  Pastore  and  Hickenlooper,   Congressmen
Holifield,  Price  and  Hosmer,  have  all  been  won  over  to  the
anti-test  cessation  point  of  view  by  the  AEC.   The   searching
critical  kind   of   questions   with  which   Senator   Anderson   on
past   occasions  has  pricked   the  propaganda   balloons   of   the
AEC was  nowhere in  evidence  at  these  hearings.   Indeed  scien-
tists  were  frightened   off  from   testifying  by  word   that   Dr.
BetRe had  been  subjected  to  rough  questioning  in  an  executive
session  several  weeks  ago  for  sending  the  New   York  Times  a
letter  in  which  he  called  the  Russian  compromise  proposal   "a
major  step  forward."  Dr.  Bethe  was  accused  of  having  reached
this  judgment  before  seeing  the  text  of  the  Soviet   proposal
though    Chairman   Anderson   of   the   Joint   Committee   and
Chairman  McCone  of  the  AEC had  leaped  into  print  to  attack
the  offer  without  waiting  either.    Apparently  the  privilege  of
jumping  to  conclusions  is  limited  to  those  who  favor  testing.
The  preconceptions   of  the  Committee  were  evident  in  the
double  standard  it  applied  to  the  race  between  the  means  of
detection  and  the  means  of  concealment.   It  tended  to  dismiss
suggestions  for  improved  detection,  no  matter  how well  based,
as purely theoretical  but  it treated  ideas  for  better  concealment,
no  matter  how  conjectural,  as  if  they  were  fully  proven- and
Not  A  Difficult   Problem
Dr.  Richard  B.  Roberts,  geophysicist  with  the  Car-
negie   Institution,    vice   chairman   of   the   science  and
technology  panel  of  the  Democratic  Advisory   Council,
told  the  Holifield  hearings   (1)   that   "for   the  last  five
years  at  least   we  have   known   that   seismic  detection
would   be   an   important   element   in   the   nuclear   test
ban  but  there   has  not  been  a  corresponding  accelera-
tion   in  the   work,"   (2)   it  was   "a  sad  commentary   on
the   amount   of   work"   being   done   on   seismology  -in
this  country   that   "about  40  percent   of  the  data   avail-
able   comes  from   two  men  working  half-time"  at   the
Carnegie    Institution    and   (3)    that    the    problem   of
distinguishing     nuclear    explosions    from    earthquakes
"looks   very   promising"   compared    to   other   problems
he  has  worked   on  "which   at  the  outset  looked   almost
impossible,     like    the    proximity    fuse."     The    17-man
panel,  which  includes  three  Nobel  prize  winners,  issued
a   statement   two   days    after    the   Holifield   hearings
closed,   strongly   reiterating   support    for   a   test   ban
agreement,   deploring    inadequate   research   in   seismic
detection   and  urging   the   government    to   commission
a   high   priority   study   in   the   field.
attained  realities.   The  result  has  been  to  put  pressure  on  ad-
vocates  of  a  treaty  to  act  as  if  the  Russians really  were  going
to  build  huge  Rockefeller  Centres  underground  all  over   the
Soviet  Union  for  clandestine  nuclear  detonations.   The  origi-
nal  network  agreed  on  in  Geneva  two  years  ago  called  for  21
"listening  posts"  in  the  Soviet  Union.   Richard  Latter  of  the
Rand   Corporation   testified   that  with   30  stations  the  system
could  be  made  as  effective  as  that  envisaged  in   1958,   that  is
down  to  the  5 kiloton  threshold.   But  this would  not  take  care
of   Dr.   Teller's   "big   holes."    To   meet   this   argument,   Dr.
Roberts  of  the  Carnegie  Institute  suggested  a  400-km  network
of  125  stations  and  Dr.  Bethe  a  200-km  network  of  600  un-
manned  stations.   These  could  detect  even  20  kiloton  explo-
sions  decoupled  by  a  factor  of   300  or  1/15th  of  a  kiloton.
Detection  Stations  Every  Ten  Feet?
This  made  headlines,  but  it  was  intended,  Dr.  Bethe   later
explained,  as  a  purely  theoretical  computation.    Actually  the
seismic  areas of  the  Soviet Union  in  which  an  explosion  might
be mistaken for  an  earthquake  and  the  areas  in  which  there  are
underground   salt   domes   in   which   nuclear   blasts   could   be
muffled  are  limited.*  So  he  estimated  after  his  Monday'night
talk  that  fewer  than  300  unmanned  stations would  seem  to  be
ample  to  safeguard  against  a  maximum  amount  of   muffling,
though  as  Dr.  Harold  Brown  of  Lawrence  Radiation  Labora*
tory  said  ironically at  one  point  during  the  hearings,  "One  can
have  people  at  stations  ten  feet  apart  and  one  could  get  the
threshold  down  very low."  The  problem  will  soon  be  moving
out  Russians to  make  room  for  more  inspectors.
"I  have  discussed  all  this  quite  seriously,"   Dr.   Bethe   told
the   Philosophical   Society  after   outlining   his   plan   for   un-
manned   stations   every   125  miles   across  the   Soviet   Union,
"but   I  think  we're  all  behaving  like  a  bunch  .of   lunatics  to
take  this  big  hole  seriously."                                                                                                        '
*Dr.  Richard   Latter  testified   that  about  90  percent  of  the
earthquakes  in  the  Soviet  Union  occur  in  about  five  percent
of  its  total  area.    Dr.  Bethe  said  that  as  to  salt  domes  in
which   to  muffle  tests  "we  once  had  an  estimate  which   was
that  it  was  quite  a  lot  less  than  one  percent  of  the  Soviet
Union  which  would  be  eligible  for  such  excavations."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May 2,1960
Signs  In  and  Out  of  Congress  That  Witch  Hunt  Politics  Are  On The  Decline
Roosevelt  Offers  Leadership  in  Fight  to  End  Un-American  Committee
There  were  signs within the  past  week  that  the  time  is com-
ing  when   it  may  be  possible  to  get  rid  of  the  House  Un-
American  Activities  Committee.   The   Republican   primary  in
New  Jersey  April  19  was  one  of  them.   It  demonstrated  that
witch  hunt  politics no  longer  paid  off.  Robert  Morris, counsel
of  the  Senate Internal Security Committtee  in  its  attack  on  the
Institute  of   Pacific  Relations  and  Owen   Lattimore  was  badly
defeated  despite  big  moneyed  support  in  his  effort  to  take  the
Republican  Senatorial  nomination  from  the  incumbent,  Case,
one  of  the  few  liberals  in  the   GOP.
That  same day,  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  Mrs. Edith
Green   (D.   Ore),   one  of  the  spunkiest  progressives   in  Con-
gress,  led  off  a  debate  on  "freedom  of  religion",  by  which  she
meant  freedom  from  the  kind  of  scurrilous attack  made  on  the
National  Council  of  Churches  by  the  Air  Force  Manual,  and
by  the  crackpot  elements  which  find  a  sounding  board  in  the
House   Un-American  Activities  Committee.    Fourteen   mem-
bers  rose  to  support  Mrs.  Green  and  four  others  were  given
permission  to  do  so  in  extension  of  remarks.*
A  Feeble  Smear  The  Only  Reply
Mrs.  Green  and  her  colleagues  filled  36  pages  of  the  Con-
gressional  Record  with  a  documented  defense  of  the  National
Council  and  an  expose  of   its  critics.   There  was  no  answer
from  Walter  and  his  supporters  but  next  day  Jackson  of  Cali-
fornia,  one  of  the  wooliest  members  of  the  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee,  delivered   a  fresh   attack  on  the   Council,
Court  to  Hear  Braden
The  Supreme  Court  last  Monday  agreed  to  hear  the
appeal  of  Carl  Braden  from  a  conviction   for   contempt
of   the   House   Un-American   Activities  Committee  and
set   it   down   for   argument    with   the   companion  case
of   Frank   Wilkinson.    "I   believe,"   Mr.   Braden   said,
"that   the   Supreme   Court   will   uphold   the  right  of  a
citizen    to   work   for   integration   without   being    con-
stantly   harassed   by   the   segregationists   who  control
the  House   Un-American   Activities  Committee   and  the
Senate   Internal   Security   Committee."
•The  fourteen  were  Ullman  (Ore),  Reuss  (Wis),  Clem   Mil-
ler  (Cal)  Hechler  (W.  Va.),   Meyer  (Vt),  Kastenmeiei-  (Wis),
Johnson  (Col),  O'Hara  (Mich)  Brademas  (Ind),  Udall  (Ariz),
Wright   (Tex),   Cohelan   (Cal),   Barr   (Col)    and   Schwengel
(Iowa).  The  four  were  Wolf   (Iowa),  Quigley  (Penn),  Karth
(Minn)  and  Lindsay  (NY),  all  but  last  named  are  Democrats.
claiming  that  of  240  books  recommended   by  it  on  a  reading
list   about  the  Negro   problem   some   were   "obscene".    Mrs.
Green  challenged  Jackson  to  name  them  but  he  said  they  were
too   "improper"   for   insertion  in   the   Congressional    Record.
The  only  book  he  mentioned  was  Bucklin  Moon's   "Without
Magnolias,"  and  Mrs.  Green  thereupon  produced  a  letter  from
the  Postoffice  Dept.  rebutting  Jackson's  charge  that  it  has  been
declared  unmailable as  obscene.
Then  last  Monday  Congressman   James  Roosevelt  of   Cali-
formnia  delivered  a major  speech  (see  excerpts  in  box  below)
calling  for  the  abolition  of  the  House  Committee  and   expos-
ing   its   high-handed,   irresponsible  and   cruel   treatment   of
teachers  in  California.   Mr.  Roosevelt  began  with  an  apology
for  having  spoken  "too  obliquely"  on  the  subject  last  year  and
giving  Chairman  Walter   "a  colorable   reason  for  thinking   I
had  no  criticism  of  the  Committee  itself."   This  year  there
could   be  no  mistake  about  Mr.   Roosevelt's   intention.     We
suggest  that  special  "abolition"   committees  in  every  Congres-
sional   district  circulate  his   speech   and   ask   all   candidates
whether  they will  vote  to  abolish  the  committee  when  the  new
Congress  meets  in  January.
From  Roosevelt's   Historic  Speech  Calling  for  Abolition  of  the  Un-American  Committee
"The   Committee  indicts   itself  by its  very  conduct  .  .  .
First  of  all,  it  spends  large  amounts  of  needed  time,  energy
and  money  in  ponderously  investigating   and  restating  the
obvious  .  .  .  Second,  it  combines   with  this  a   contrasting
inability  to  understand  the  very  real  complexities  of  human
behavior  .  .  .  Its  world  is  one of  black  and  white  .  .  .
Third,   as   the   Air   Force   Manual  controversy   illustrates,
the  Committee  has  repeatedly   shown  its  inability  to  stick
to  its  own business   .  .  .  Fourth,   the  Committee  has no
real  usefulness  . .  . The various  police  and counter-espion-
age   agencies   do  what   the   Committee  merely   claims   to
do   ...
"Fifth,   despite  the existence  of the  police  . .  . the  Com-
mittee   has   undertaken   to   constitute    itself   as   a   roving
police  and  prosecution   agency  .  .  .  Sixth,  the  Committee
also  acts  as  a  Court  .  .  .  yet  it  is  not  subject  to  the re-
straints ...  we impose  upon  our  judiciary.
"Seventh,   the   mandate   which  we  did  in  fact   give   the
Committee  is  itself   defective   and  inherently   contrary   to
our  democratic  traditions.    How  did  we  come  to  establish
a  Committee  to  decide   what   was  'un-American,'  and  still
worse   how  did   we  persude   ourselves   that   propaganda,
speech,   was  a  fit   subject   for   regulation   by   inquisitional
techniques  such   as  the  Committee  employs?     To  me,  the
very  nature   of  that  commission  is  at   war  with  our   pro-
foundest   principles,   and   it   cannot   help   but   be   executed
in   a   manner   destructive   of   those   principles.     We   have,
in   effect,   created   an   agency   to  supervise   the   exercise   of
First  Amendment  rights,  an  organ  for  censorship   and  sup-
pression.
"Finally,   then,   we  come  to  what   I  think  is   the   most
serious   criticism   of  the   Committee,  the   fact  that  it   has
become  an   agency   for   the   destruction   of  human   dignity
and  constitutional  rights  . . ,  Endlessly  they  are  dragooned
before  the  Committee  and  accused.    Secret   sources,   arro-
gance,  rudeness,   maximized  defamation,  and  the  threat  of
prosecution   either    for   perjury   or   contempt   if   they   do
not  seek  the  refuge  of  silence  are   the  constant  ingredients -
of   this  degrading   spectacle.    Beyond  this,  the  Committee
is   sanctimoniously  cruel.     Those   who  would  answer    the
charges   against   themselves   are   forced   to   accuse   others
and   become  the agents  of  further   havoc  .  .  .
"Mr.  Speaker,  fellow  members  of  the  House,  it  is, I  think,
a  monstrous  thing  that  we have  created  such  an  institution
and  lent  it  our  powers  and  prestige.    But  we  can  also  end
this  terrible  agency  and take  back  our powers  ,  .  .
"I   urge  the  rest  of  my  colleagues   to  give  this  matter
serious   thought   and  to  speak   of  it   when  they   return   to
their   constituencies  this-summer.    I   think   we  need   only
break-that  spell  of  anxiety  tor  find  wide  support  for   the
abolition   of   this  thoroughly  bad  institution.     Then  those
who  return  here  next  January  can  complete  this  imperative
task  which  is  the  business  of  this  House  alone.   We  would
then  be  acting   in  the   service   of  our  best  traditions.   Let
us  set  our  House  aright."
—Rep.  James  Roosevelt  (D.  Cal.)  in  the  House  April  25.
6   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 2, 1960
De  Gaulle's  Glamorous  Visit  Should  Not  Blind  Us  to  His  Failure  in   Algeria
Rhee's  Fall  A  Warning: All  the World's  Divided  Countries  Are Time Bombs
If  there  were  daring  statesmanship in  Washington,  Moscow
would  now  be challenged  to  stabilize the  world  East  and  West
by  agreeing  to  internationally  supervised  free  elections   in  all
divided  countries:  Germany,  Korea,  and  Vietnam  including  a
plebiscite  on  Formosa;  appended  to  this  a  proposal  to  demili-
tarize  these  in-between  areas  as  permanent   "zones  of  peace"
free  from  big  power  rivalry.   The  U.S.  has  been  for  free  elec-
tions  in  Germany  but  not  in  Korea  and  Vietnam;  Moscow  has
been  for  free  elections  in  Korea  and  Vietnam  but  not  in Ger-
many,   liach  side  favors  free  elections  where  it  expects  to  win
the  outcome,  and  each  side  has  its  rationalizations   for con-
tinued  division.   But  each  of  these  divided  countries  is a  sput-
tering  fuse  that  can  set  off  civil  and   international  war  al  any
time.   How  firmly  in  power  Rhee  appeared  to  be  ;\  lew months
ago!    Ho\v   solid   the   Ulbrichl   regime  appears  to   be  today!
How   cjuickly  in  these  dictatorships  determined   demonstrators
can  bring  down  the  facade  of  order!  The  danger  is  not  the
reunification  of  Germany—on  the  contrary  a  divided  Germany
will  breed  new  nationalist  poisons  in  the  susceptible German
people—but  its  remilitarization.   A  united  Germany  in  a  zone
of  peace  without arms  could  still  mobilize  the  enthusiasm of
enough  ordinary  Germans to  make  this  a  viable  solution.
If  Rhee  Had  Nuclear  Weapons
There  is a  second  lesson  in Korean  events.  Note  that  Rhee's
Ambassador  was  not  invited  to  sit  in  Tuesday  afternoon   (just
before  Rhee's  resignation)  at  the  meeting  in  the  State  Depart-
ment  of  the  nations which  take  part  in  the  Korean  UN  com-
mand.   What  the  U.S.  and  its allies  feared,  what  they  felt  hid
better  be  discussed  without  the  presence  oi  Rhee's  envoy, was
the  possibility  that  he  might  try  to  unleash war  against  North
Korea  tu  save  his  regime.   This,  has  been  the  anxiety  of   U S.
military    forces    for    many    months,   safeguarded    against    by
siriclly  rationing  Rhee's  supplies.    But   let  us  move  the   clock
ahead  ten  years  when  the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons  has   put
l
:
ic
j
in   in  ihe  hands  of  these  smaller  countries.   What   if  Rhee
h.iii   micLar  arms   with   which   he   o.iuld   swiftly   precipitate   a
hi'1'K'.uis! ?   Imagine  a  world  in  which  there were  nuclear arms
Hat's Off to The  New  York  Times
We  take  our   hat   off   to   the   New   York   Times   for
speaking   out   in   its   best   tradition   April   21   for   the
release   of   Dr.  Willard   Uphaus,   still   in   jail   in  New
Hampshire,   and  for   its   editorial   the   same   day pro-
testing   the  Niukkanen  deportation.     The   Washington
Post   April  23  joined  the  New   York  Times  in  calling
attention  to   the  cruelty  of   this   case.     A  51-year-old
Portland,    Oregon,   house-painter   who   came    to   this
country   from   Finland  when   one  year  old,   Niukkanen
is   married   to   an   American  and   served   honorably  in
the   Army.     The   Supreme   Court   5-to-5   upheld   his
deportation   under  the   1950  McCarran   Internal   Secu-
rity  Act  for  past  membership  in  the  Communist  party.
Niiikkcnan   was   a   member   from   1937  to   1939.    Both
newspapers  called  for  amendment of  the  law  to  repeal
the  past  membership  provision.    Won't  some  Congress-
man   introduce   a  special  bill  now   allowing  Niukkenan
(y  stay?
in  the  hands  ol   the  desperate  men   of   South  Africa,   fearing
black  Africa;  or  the  I
:
rench  military  men  in  Algeria, fearing  a
fresh   invasion   of   rebels  from  Tunisia;  or   Chiang  Kai-shek,
menaced   by  street  mobs  in  Formosa   as  Rhee  was   in   Seoul.
Here  we  can  see  the  clock  ticking  away.
The  glamorous visit  of  de  Gaulle  and  the  deserved  tributes
paid  him  should  not  shut  our  eyes to  the  realities.   De  Gaulle
is  a  great  and  eloquent  man;  a  man  to  whom  lofty  utterance
comes  as  second  nature;  a  man  incapable  of  the  banal  or  pe-
destrian;  a  man  of  insight  but  still  a  prisoner.     A   prisoner,
first  of  his  own  nationalism,  which  has  led  him  to  pluck  the
poisoned    I rait   of   nuclear   weapons   knowledge;    a   prisoner,
secondly,   of   the   shabby  conspirators,   malcontents,   dead-end
military  men  and   Fascists  who   brought  him   to  power.    De
Gaulle's  assets  of  Arab  good  will  are  dwindling;  his  regime
is  bogged   down  in  the  old  immobilisme  on  the  key  question
of  Algeria:  this
1
  will  decide  whether  France  is  to  remain  free
or  face  a  Fascist  challenge  in  the  streets;  and  this  is  an  inter-
national   problem   because   if   Chinese   Communist   volunteers
appear  in  the  Algerian war,  the  repercussions  will  draw  us  in.
//    Ve»«i  St'tul  A  Stainiti'il  Sflf-Addri'ssed     Long  Envelope,   K'v'H  Send  A  free   Copy   of  This   Week's   to  A  Friend
I.   K  Stone's  Weekh,   5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City      ......._............................ ...Zone............State.. ..................
5/U/OO
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   .............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone.....
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?
..State....................
Yes  D    No  D
I. E Stones   Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   .Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.   Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub
Untied  every   Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  at  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W..  Washington   US,  D.  C.
AD    Independent    weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
B  In  the    IT.   R.:  M  In  Canada:  SIO  rlaewhen.    Air  Mall  rates:  SIR to  Europe:  S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED