I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960oct03.pdf

============================================================

That  Was No  Lincoln-Douglas Debate, P.  4
For  the  Voice  of  the  New  Africa on World Problems  See  the  Nkrumah Boxes,  Pages  2-3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  35
OCTOBER  3,  1960
101
    WASHINGTON, D.  C.
16  CENTS
How  the  Neutrals  See the  Struggle  at  the  UN
United   Nations,  Sept.  27
The   U.S.  press  is  behaving  almost  as  badly  as  the  Soviet
press  in  providing its  readers  with  a  distorted  view  of  what
is  going  on  at  this  session  of  the  United  Nations.     The  re-
porters  act  more  and  more  like  a  claque  and  mob,  cheering
our  side  and  hooting  theirs  in  a  way  which  may  comfort  the
President  and  Secretary  of  State  but  gives  foreign  visitors  a
poor  opinion  of  our  free  press.    Like  the  Russian  reporters,
ours—with   some  honorable  exceptions—get  their   cue  from
official  briefings  and  run  in  so  overwhelming  a  pack  the  lone
dissenter  is  made  to  feel  unpatriotic.    But  our  national  inter-
ests  are  poorly  served  by  misinformation,  particularly  when
we  confront  a  new  United  Nations   dominated  by  neutrals.
It  is more  important than  ever  to  understand  the  neutral  point
of  view.    I  want  to  try  and  sketch  its  main  outlines  here.
Main  Enemy  the  Belgians
1.  The  main  enemy  as  the  neutrals  see  it   in  the   Congo
crisis  is  not  the  danger  of  Russian  penetration   but  the  con-
tinued  success of  the  Belgians  in  detaching  and  controlling  the
two  rich  portions  of  the  Congo:   uranium-rich  Katanga  and
diamond-producing Kasai. As  the  neutrals see it,  a  legally  con-
stituted   government,   that  of   Kasavubu  and   Lumumba,   the
product   of   orderly   elections  under   the   Congo  constitution,
appealed  to the  UN  for  aid  against  Belgian  aggression  only  to
find  that  the  UN  was treating  its  Belgian-inspired  secessionist
'  elements  on  an  equal  plane  with  its  central  government,  and
thus  encouraging  not  only  secession  but  upsetting  the  fragile
stability  of  the  new  government  at  its  center.    When  Nasser
told  the  General  Assembly today  that  "the  Congo  presents  us
with  a  masked  imperialism,  which  does  not  shrink  from  ex-
ploiting  the  United  Nations  organization  itself,  in  order  to
realize  its hidden  designs  and  aims,"  his  words  should  not  be
dismissed  as  Soviet propaganda;  this  is how  Africa  feels.
2.  There   is  hardly  a  new  State  in  Africa  which  is  really
a  nation,  which  is  not  beset  by  tribal  and  regional   rivalries
and  where  foreign  interests may  not  conspire  as  in  the  Congo
to  detach  the   richest  portions.     This   is  what  Kkrumah  of
Ghana  meant  when  he  told  the  General   Assembly  Sept.   23
"What  is  happening  in  the  Congo  today  may  happen  in  any
other  part  of  Africa  tomorrow,  and  what  the  United   Nations
does  today  must  set  a  precedent  or  a  pattern  for  what  it  may
have to  do tomorrow."   There is not a single  African or  Asian
State  which  will  contradict  Nkrumah's  assertion  that  once  the
UN  goes  to  the  assistance  of  a  country  which  invites   inter-
vention  "it  owes  an  obligation  to  the  Government  and  people
of  that  country  not  to  interfere  in  such  a  way  as  to  prevent
the  legitimate  Government  which  invited  it  to  enter  the  coun-
try  from  fulfilling  its  mandate.    In  other  words,  it  is  impos-
Not  to  Be  Lost  Sight  Of
"As  for  the  Congo's own revenues, he  [Stere  Lanner,
head  of   UN   civilian  aid]   said  the  splitting  away  of
Katanga  had  cut  the  Congo's  income  60 percent."
—"UN    Congo   Aide   Fears    'Disaster'    New    York
Times,  Sept.  28, dispatch  from  Leopoldville.
"Tshombe  said  in  the  Katanga capital,  Elisabethville,
that  he  is  willing  to  collaborate  with  other  regions  of
the  Congo  but  that  he  will  fight  on  for  Katanga's  inde-
pendence.    He  said   Katanga   was  willing  to   enter  a
confederation  but  only  as  'a  sovereign  state'."
—"Mobutu  Bids  Rival  Chiefs   to 'Summit' "  Washing-
ton  Post, from  Leopoldville, Sept.  28.
"Just  how  independent Mr. Tshombe  wishes  Katanga
to  be  is  still  a  mystery to  UN  officials  here.    His  reli-
ance  on  Belgian officials,  technicians  and  officers  is  still
considerable.    Mr.  Berendson, Political  Director  of   the
UN  here  called  Friday, on  President  Tshombe  to   offer
him  UN  technical  aid.    Mr.  Tshombe  thanked  him  but
replied  that  Katanga  was  satisfied  with  the   technical
help  it  was  already  receiving  from  Belgium."
—London  Daily  Telegraph,  Sept.   26,  dispatch   from
Elisabethville,  capital  of   Katanga.
"Brussels,   Sept.   27—Premier   Gaston   Eyskens   said
today  Belgium  is  ready  to  grant  any  requested  help  to
the  Congo  but  is  'determined  to  safeguard  her  moral
and  material  interests'  there."
—Reuters.
1   3   :t
sible  for  the  United  Nations  at  one  and  the  same  time  to
preserve  law  and  order  and  be  neutral  between  the  legal  au-
thorities  and  the  kw   breakers."
3.  While the  U.S.  press  is praising  Hammarskjold  for  keep-
ing  the  Russians  out  of  the  Congo,  the  Africans  criticize  him
for  failing  to  get  the  Belgians  out.    Unlike  the  Russians,  the
Africans  are  not  prepared  to  throw  Hammarskjold  overboard.
The  Russians  are  smarting from  the  Secretary General's  action
in  shutting  off  the  airports  to  their  planes  and  from  the  Mo-
butu  affair  in  which  their  diplomatic  representatives  and  tech-
nicians  were forced  out  of  Leopoldville;  they  suspect  Western
intrigue  with  UN   complaisance   behind   this   "strong   man"
episode.    But  the  Africans  still  see the  UN  as  the  one  source
through   which  they  can  get  the  technical   aid  they  need  so
badly  without  direct  great  Power  strings  on  it,  and  the  only
means  by  which  they  can  defeat  neo-colonialist  intrigue  with-
out   being   caught   in  an  East-West  struggle.    So   Nkrumah
coupled   his  criticism  with  gentler  words  about   these   being
"the  growing  pains  of  the  UN"  and  about  it  being  "entirely
wrong   to   blame   either   the   Security  Council   or   any  senior
officials  of  the  UN  for  what  has  taken  place."    But  the  Afri-
cans  are  willing  to  support  the  Secretary  General   only  if  he
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October S, 1960
(Continued   -from   Page   One)
supports  them.   Their  price is the  restoration  of  the  Kasavubu-
Lumumba  government,  the  disarming of  "the  Belgian  officered
forces  in  the  Katanga"  (Nkrumah)  and  a  firm  hand  through
Hammarskjold's   African  consultative  committee  on  the  way
financial  and  technical  aid  is  given  the   Congo.
Moscow   Gives  Africa  Leverage
Until  they  are  sure  that  the  Secretary  General   is   moving
definitely  in  this  direction,  there  will  be  no  rally  against  the
Russian proposal  for  a trumvirate to replace  the  Secretary  Gen-
eralship.    Russian iritransigeance  gives  them  leverage;  without
the  Russian  threat  they  would  have  little  bargaining   power.
Hence the  significant  silence of  the  African  States  on  the  Rus-
sian  proposals  and  the  pointed  action  of  the  Egyptians  today
in  issuing a press release which asserted  that  Nasser's talk  with
Eisenhower  the  day before  "had  nothing  to  do with  the Secre-
tariat."    This  deflated  that  4-column  headline  at  the  top  of
the  New  York  Times  this  morning,  "Nehru  and  Nasser  Tell
President   They   Oppose  Khrushchev's  Plan"  and  that  story
under   it  which   began   (in   the  personality  cult   manner  of
Pravda),  "President  Eisenhower  scored  a  major  personal  and
diplomatic  triumph  yesterday.  .  .  ."    In  my  opinion   Nehru
is too  experienced an  operator  to have  shown  his hand  so early
when  he  was  still  engaged  in  trying  to  bring  East  and  West
together.    The  headlines  and  the  story  were  another  triumph
of  Hagertyism  over  reality.    It  is  dangerous  for  the  President
and  the  American people  to  go  on  indulging  in  the  blissful
visions  induced  by this  kind  of  opium.
4.  The  Russians  are  being  shrewder  than  we are  in  dealing
with  the  neutrals.   The  neutral  leaders  know  all  about  Hun-
gary.   The  new  African  leaders did  not  emerge  from  the  bush;
they  are  cultivated  men;  even  the  two  Congolese  who  have
addressed  the  UN,  Kanza  and  Gizenga,  spoke  with  a  grace
and  a  dignity  and  a  magnanimity toward  the  Belgians  which
won  respect.    These  men  know  the  Russians hold  their  satel-
lites  with  an  iron  hand.   But  the  Russians can point  to  Egypt
as an  example of  a country which has  accepted  extensive  Soviet
aid  'without   losing   its   independence.     However   quick   the
Russians  were  to  belabor  dissident  Hungarian  Communists  as
Horthyite landowners,  they  speak  no  such  language  when  they
go  a-wooing  in  Africa  and  Latin  America.   We,  on  the  other
The  Intervention  Nkrumah  Wants
"I,  personally,  and  my  government  have  done  every-
thing  possible  to  assist  and  advise  the  leaders  of  the
Congo  to  resolve  their  differences  and  place  their  coun-
try's  and  Africa's  interests   first.   Both  of  them,  Presi-
dent   Kasavubu   and   Prime   Minister   Lumumba,   speak
the  same  language  of  peace  and  unity.    Both  of  them
are  anxious  to  see  stability  achieved  in  their  country.
Both  of  them  agree  to  reconciliation.    What   then, pre-
vents  them   from  coming  together?    What  has  led  to
the  fake   Mobutu  episode?     I  can  assure  the   General
Assembly  that  but  for  the  intrigues  of  the  colonialists
a  document  of  reconciliation  which  has  been  drafted   in
the   presence   of   my   Ambassador   in   Leopoldville    and
approved   by   both   Mr.   Kasavubu    and   Mr.   Lumumba
would  have  been  signed  by  them.
"Imperialist  intrigue,  stark  and  naked,   was  desper-
ately  at  work  to  prevent  this  being  signed.    The  policy
of  divide  and  rule  is  still  being  practiced.    It  is  quite
clear  that  a  desperate  attempt  is  being  made  to  create
confusion   in  the  Congo,  extend  the  cold  war  to  Africa,
and  involve  Africa   in  the  suicidal   quarrels  of   foreign
Powers.    The  United  Nations  must  not  allow   this  to
happen.    We,  for  our  part,  will  not  allow  it  to  happen.
That  is why we are anxious that  the  UN,  having  reached
a  point  where  intervention  on  the  side  of  the  legitimate
Government  of  the  Congo  appears  to  be  the  obvious  and
only  answer  to  this  crisis,  should  act  boldly  through  the
medium   of   the  independent  African   States."
—Nkrumah   to  the  General  Assembly,  Sept.  23.
hand,  are  quick  to  slander  and  question  the  motives  of  those
who  will  not  do  our  bidding.    Secretary Herter's  Red  smear
remark  about  Nkrumah  horrified  the  skillful  British.    Nkru-
mah  is a  new  major  personality on  the  UN  scene,  a  man  with
ideas  and  considerable courage,  as  evidenced  by  his  support  of
Israel  and  his  plea  to  the  Arabs  to  recognize  "political  reali-
ties."    (See  boxes on  pages  two  and  three.)  Mr.  Eiserihower's
address  the  day before, though  one  of  his better  efforts,  seemed
pale  and  platitudinous  beside  the   fresh   ideas  and   eloquent
language  of  Nkrumah  next  morning.    I  was  hoping  that  the
President would  step  off the  rostrum  and  walk  over  and  shake
hands  with  Fidel  Castro  and  make  a  pleasant  American-style
joke  and  deflate  the  overblown  quarrel  between  us  and  Cuba;
a  big  man,  with  the 'imagination  to  be  unconventional!,  would
have  done  it  and  the  gesture  would  have  been  worth  millions
Nkrumah's  Version  of  How  The Trouble  in  the  Congo  Was  Precipitated
"No African  could  hope  to rise  to  the lowest  commissioned
rank  in  the  army.    The  whole  force  of  .the  Force   Publique
[the   Congo  army   organized  by  the  Belgians]  was  subject
to  extremely   harsh   discipline   and  had  very   low  rates  of
pay. ...  As  soon  as  an African  became  Minister  of  Defense,
the  incongruous  position  of  the  African  in  the  Force Pub-
lique  became  evident.
"Great  discontent  resulted.    Even  so,  the  situation  might
not  have  erupted  had  the  Belgian  commander  of  the  Force
Publique  adopted  a  realistic  attitude  towards  the  men,  and
made  any  attempt  to  redress  their  legitimate  grievances.
"Even  a  promise  of  future  reform  might  have  done  some
good.    On  the  contrary,   emphatic  statements  were  indis-
creetly  made  by  Belgian  officers  that  nothing  had  changed
and  that  life  would  go  on  in  much  the  same  way  as  before
independence;  in  short,  the  soldiers  were  told  that  indepen-
dence  was  a  sham   and  that   Belgium  still   wielded  a  big
stick.   This  produced  the  mutiny.
"When  the  mutiny  occurred,  large  numbers  of  Belgians
began  to  leave  the  country.   The  President  of  the  Republic,
Mr.  Kasavubu,  and  the  Prime  Minister,   Mr.  Lumumba,  went
to  Matadi  in  order  to  appeal  to  the  Belgians  to  remain.
But   instead,   they  were  all   taken   on  board  a  ship  on  the
advice  of  the  Belgian  Consul,  while  the  town  was  machine-
gunned   from   the   air   by   Belgian   military    aircraft   and
shelled  from  the  sea.   Despite  the  fact  that  there  were  no
Belgian  civilians  whatever  to  protect   [i.e.  in  Matadi,   the
Congo  seaport],  Belgian  troops  entered  the  town  and  shot
in  cold  blood  a  number  of  unarmed  police  and  civilians.   It
was  following  upon  this  incident  that  acts  of  organized vio-
lence  by  the  Force  Publique  began  to  occur.    These  inci-
dents,  in  turn,  provided  an  occasion  for  Belgian  military
intervention.
"Meanwhile,  ostensibly   on  the   grounds  of   safeguarding
the  lives  of  Belgians  in  the  Province,  Belgian  troops  entered
Katanga  in  considerable numbers  and  enabled  the   Chairman
of  the  Provincial  Council,  Moise  Tshombe,  to  set  himself  up
as  the  head  of  a  so-called  independent  state."
—President   Nkrumah   of   Ghana  addressing   the  15th Session   of   the   UN   General  Assembly,  Sept.    %S,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   October  S,  I860
in  Latin  America.    As  it  is,  we  hurt  ourselves  by  smearing  in
Nkrumah  the  new  Africa's  leading  spokesman  and  by  osten-
tatiously  seeking  to  ostracize  in  Castro  the  hero  of  the  Latin
American  masses.    This  pantomime,  compared  with  Khrush-
chev's  bear  hug  for  Fidel,  is  the  poorest  kind  of  public  rela-
tions,  however  much  it  may be applauded  in  the  rather  loutish
atmosphere  our  right  wing  papers  have  created  in  New  York
City  toward  the  United  Nations.
Giddy  With  Rocket   Success
5.  The  neutrals were  dismayed  by  the  tone  of  Khrushchev's
speech  to  the  Assembly.    Its  tone  made  political  sense  only  if
he  was trying to warn  the  Western  powers  that  he  could  cause
plenty  of  trouble  for  them  in  Africa  if  they  did  not  sit  down
and  deal  with  him  or  if  it  was  intended  to  show  Peking  that
Khrushchov  could  make  like  a  revolutionary  leader,  too.    In-
deed  the  Russians  to  cover  their  flank  against  critics  of   his
speech  spread  the  story  that  he  had  to  talk  that  way  in  order
to  appease  Peking;  I'm  inclined  to think  this  a publicity smoke-
screen;  Moscow  doesn't  have  to  dance  to  Peking's   tune.     I
am  inclined  to  put  the  tone  down  to  Khrushchev's  nouveau
riche  peasant  exuberance;  his  rockets  have  made  him,  in  Stal-
in's  words,  a  little  giddy  with  success.    If  the  Russians want
to end  the  cold  war, they  ought  not  to make  cold  war  speeches.
If  they  want  co-existence,  they  cannot  at  the  same  time  talk
like  neo-Jacobins  leading   an   African   mob   to  revolutionary
war  against  the  West.   A  few words  of  praise  for  the  English
and  French  in  those  areas  where  they  have  prepared   native
elites  to  take  over  would   have   been  tactful  and   made  his
criticism  of  the  Belgians all  the  more  potent.    The  fury  of  the
British  spokesman  after  the  Khrushchov  speech  was  genuine
if   unexpectedly  violent;   Russia's  own   "colonial"   record   in
East  Europe  shows  considerably   less  concern   for  the   feeling
of  the  native  masses than  do  the  British  even  in  Rhodesia  and
Kenya.    In  any  case  the  Congo's  experience  shows  that  what
the  remaining  colonial  areas  of  Africa  need  is  not  so  much
immediate  independence  as  immediate   steps   under  interna-
tional  auspices  to  prepare  their  peoples  for  peaceful  transition
to  self-government.     Otherwise  they  must  fall  victims  to  new
Nkrumah  on  Nuclear   Questions
Nkrumah,  in  the  General Assembly,  Sept.  23  proposed
that  the  UN  "encourage  the  growth  of  zones  free  from
nuclear  warfare";  asked  the  nuclear   powers   "to  keep
Africa  out  of  their  nuclear  warfare  plans";  suggested
that   the   problem  of   overcoming   mutual  suspicion   in
policing  nuclear  agreements  might  be  solved  by  using
inspection   teams   from   "the   small   uncommitted   na-
tions";  protested  French  nuclear  tests  in  the  Sahara;
urged  the  other  nuclear  powers  to  let  the  French   use
"their  own  testing  grounds"  instead;  and  called  on  the
African  States  to  isolate  Africa  from  nuclear  war  by
acting  to  prevent  any  nuclear   State  "from  possessing
military  bases"  on  their   continent.
forms  of  control  either  from  West  or  East.
6.  But  the  neutrals  would  be  more  ready  to  take  note  of
Soviet  shortcomings  if  our  press  were  not  so  overwhelmingly
raucuous  in  its exaggerations.   From  the  neutral  point  of  view,
we  are  still  using  our  power  against  the  true  wishes  even  of
Britain  and  France  to  keep  China  out  of  the  UN  and  to main-
tain  the  Formosan  farce.    From  their  point  of  view,  we  are
just  as stubborn as the  Russians if  not  more  so  about  breaking
the  ice for  a  new  try  at  summit  talks.    Most  important  of  all
in  neutral  eyes  is  the   issue  of  disarmament.    They  see  the
arms  race  wasting  the  substance  they  need  to  free  themselves
from  poverty and  creating  tensions  which  must  lead  to  a  war
from  which  they  could  not  protect  themselves.     One  neutral
speaker  after  another  stressed  disarmament as a No.  1 concern.
Yet  here  the  Russians  have  very  concrete  proposals  while  we
are  still  offering  little  but  talk  of  control.   The  new  Khrush-
chov  proposals  moved a  little  further  in  the  direction  of  meet-
ing  Western  objections,  particularly  in  offering  a  sharper  cut
of  conventional  forces  in  the  first  stage.    If  our  government
thinks  their  offer  Utopian,  it  is  up  to  us  to  offer  something  of
our  own  and  really  to  negotiate.    The  Soviet  proposal  today
to  add five neutrals  (India,  Indonesia,  Mexico,  Ghana  and  the
UAR)  to  the  ten  nation  disarmament  commission  seems  emi-
nently  sensible  to  the  neutrals.    Our  first  swift  reaction  of
rejection  would  wisely  be  reconsidered.
Nkrumah on Other  World Problems  in His  Speech  to  the  UN  General Assembly
ON   AFRICA:   Nkrumah   proposed   that   the   Union   of
South  Africa  be  asked  to  surrender  its  mandate  over   South
West  Africa  to  a  committee  of  all  the  independent  African
States  under  the  UN;  accused  the  Union  of  South  Africa  of
establishing   "a  policy  of  racial  discrimination  and   persecu-
tion  which  in  its   essential   inhumanity  surpasses  even  the
brutality  of  the  Nazis  against  the  Jews";  declared  that  in
Portugese   Africa   "there  exists  forced  labor  which  is   akin
to  slavery"  and  called  on  Portugal's  fellow  NATO  members
to  force  her  to  grant  independence  to  her  African  colonies
in  keeping  with  the  NATO  preamble's  words  about   uphold-
ing   "democracy,   individual  liberty   and  the   rule   of   law;"
called  for  an  end of  the  war  in  Algeria  by  negotiations  with
"The   Algerian   Nationalist   Government"   on   the   basis  of
those  principles  of  self-determination   which  de  Gaulle  him-
self  proclaimed a  year  ago;  pointed  out  that  of  230  million
people  in  Africa  only  3  percent  were  of  non-African   origin
and  said  "no reasonable  solution  can  be  found to  the  African
problem ...  if  political   thinking   in  regard  to  a   solution
begins  with  the  rights  of  the  3  percent;"  asked  the  UN  to
call  on  all   member  States  to  grant   independence   to  their
remaining  African  colonies  and  proposed  a  permanent  Afri-
can  seat  on the  Security  Council  when  the  Charter  is  revised.
ON  THE  MIDDLE  EAST:  Called  for  settlement   of   the
Israel   dispute   by   "recognition    of   the   political   realities",
by  guaranteeing  Israel  and  the  Arab  States  from  attack  by
each  other  and  by  an  arrangement   to  "keep  the  cold  war
out  of  the  Middle East;  proposed  steps  be  taken  to  exploit
the  region's  oil  wealth  "on  a  non-competitive  basis."
ON  THE  FAR  EAST:  Called  for  admission  of  Communist
China  to  the  UN,  and  urged   general   elections  to  end  the
continued  division  of  Vietnam  and  Korea,  recalling   Nehru's
plea  against  moving  UN  forces  north  of  the  38th   parallel
after  the  North  Koreans  had  been  driven,  back.
ON  DISARMAMENT:  Proposed   that   the   UN   establish
technical   teams   to   study   "what   could   be   done   with   the
resources  which  are at  present  being  wasted  in   armaments";
said  an  explosion  could  be  averted  if  population  grew  in  the
underdeveloped  countries   while  the  resources  they   needed
continued  to  be  wasted  on  the  arms  race;  and  noted  that  in
some   countries"   industrial   prosperity    is   associated  with
armament  "and  a  recession with  a  slowing  down  of  military
effort"  because  "disarmament  is  looked  at  in a  vacuum"  and
not  "as  a  means   for  the  redeployment   of  the  capital  re-
sources  and the  technical  skills  now  being  used  for  military
purposes."
1   4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   October  3, 1960
Great  Debate  Provokes   Great  Yawn:  Nixon   More  Liberal  Than  Kennedy  on  Red  Menace
We  Predict  Nixon-Kennedy  Show  Will  Have Trouble  Getting A  Sponsor
For  the  first  time,  incredibly, after  years of  exasperated  TV
viewing,  I  found  myself  wishing for  a  commercial as that  long
hour  of  sedate  debate  between  Nixon  and  Kennedy  dragged
on.    Both  candidates  seemed  grown  up  brighter-than-average
high   school   debaters,  well  stocked  with  statistics,  and   fully
capable,  like  all  good   debaters,  of  switching  sides  with  un-
diminished  earnestness.    But  neither  emanated  that  flame  of
conviction,  whether  for  good  or  evil,  which  creates  leadership.
Kennedy  seemed  a  trifle  more  agile,  perhaps   because  Nixon
had  the  stodgier   side  to  defend.    Viewed  close  up,  neither
side  of  Kennedy's  very  asymmetrical  face  seemed  particularly
attractive.    As  for  Nixon  there  were  moments,  when  he  tried
to  smile,  which  were  downright  frightening;   he  looked   like
an  undertaker  congratulating   a  steady  customer  on   another
death  in  the  family.
Kennedy  Begins  to  Sound  Like  John  Foster  Duties
Howard   K.   Smith   as  moderator   was   funereal;   the   four
reporters  were  as  dull  as  the  two  candidates.   I  felt  as  if  I
had  been  smoking  more  and  enjoying  it  less,  and  that  neither
Nixon  nor  Kennedy tasted  as  good  as a  good  cigarette  should.
Kennedy's   opener,   which   sought   to   associate  himself   with
Abraham  Lincoln,  about  the  world  too  not  being  able  to  go
on  half  free  and  half  slave  was  worn  to  shreds  by  the  late
John   Foster   Dulles   whom  Kennedy  is  beginning   more  and
more  to  resemble.    He   also  borrowed  FDR's  line  about  a
rendez-vous  with  destiny,  apparently  on  the  same  advertising
technique  of  creating  glamor  by  association.    We  predict  that
these  debates will  have  a  hard  time getting  a  sponsor.
In  the  only  exchange  that  touched  on  civil  liberties,  Nixon
emerged  more  liberal  than  Kennedy.    Asked  about  the  Com-
munist   menace,  Kennedy  thought   we   should   "support   the
laws  which  the  U.S. has  passed  in  order  to  protect  us  from
those  who  would  destroy  us  from  within"   and   sustain   the
FBI.    By  comparison,  Nixon   sounded  like  an  ACLU-er;  he
thought  that  while  we  should  be  alert,  we  ought   also  to  be
fair   "because   by  being   fair   [we   do   hope   Helen   Gahagan
Douglas  was  listening]  we  uphold  the  very  freedoms that  the
Communists  would   destroy."     He   stressed  the  "few" who
A  Telegram  to  Kennedy
"We  applaud  your  call  for  new  efforts  to  aid  under-
developed  countries,  especially   through  the  UN.  How-
ever,   we  question  your  assumption   that   the  Commu-
nists  will  not  'talk  about  disarmament'  until  we  have
an  invulnerable  superior  nuclear   capacity.    Since 1955
the  Russians  have  been  trying  to  promote  disarmament
negotiations;   the   problem  has   been   to   get   them   to
accept   adequate   inspection.     They   have   signed   both
Austrian   and   Antarctic   treaties.     Nuclear    test   ban
agreement  could be  reached  within months  if  both  sides
were  sufficiently  determined.   There  is  no  need  to  wait
for  an  illusory  military capability before  reaching  first
step  disarmament  agreement  to  bring   mounting dan-
gers  of  the  arm  race  under  control.    We  urge  you  if
elected  to  achieve  during  your  first  90  days   conclusion
of   a   test   ban   treaty   and   establishment    of   national
peace   agency."
—National   Committee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear   Policy
—Friends   Committee   on  National   Legislation  by  E.
Raymond    Wilson.
This  telegram  was  sent  Senator   Kennedy   Sept.  22
after  the  speech  in  which  he  said  that  during  his  first
90  days  in  office  our  next  President  should  ask  Congress
for  funds  "to  give  us  a  nuclear retaliatory  power  second
to  none,  make  it  invulnerable  to  surprise  attack"  and
conventional  forces  for  "brush  fire"  wars,  adding  "only
then  can  we  get  Mr.  Khrushchov  and  the  Chinese   Com-
munists  to  talk  seriously  about   disarmament."
become  Communists and  fellow  travellers  and  said  we  fight
communism  by  fighting  the  injustices  "the Communists  feed
upon."    This  is  a  good  point  at  which  to  recall  that  Nixon
and  Kennedy  both  voted  in  1950 to  override  Truman's   veto
of  the  Internal  Security Act.  On  the  civil  liberties  question
Nixon  was  the  new  Nixon  but  Kennedy  the  old  Kennedy.*
* Victor  Lasky  in  a   letter  published   by   the   Washington
Post  Sept.  22  quoted  from  an  article  in  the  New  Republic  of
Oct.  13,  1952 by  Dr.  John  P.  Mallan,  then  of  Harvard  Univer-
sity.     Dr.   Mallan  reported   that   Kennedy   told   an   informal
gathering  at  Harvard Nov. 10, 1950  "that  he  rather  respected
Joe   McCarthy",  and  "he  personally   was   very   happy"   over
Helen  Gahagan  Douglas's  defeat  by   Nixon.
Why  Not  A  Gift   Sub  to  That  Boy  or  Girl  Off  to  College—Give  Them  A  Fresh  View  of  the   World  Each  Week
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City     .
..Zone............State..
10/3/00
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.) additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.   Stone'8  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter   at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays   but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618 Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15  D   C
An   Independent    weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
IS  In  the  D.  8.;  $8  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa-
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED