I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960dec05.pdf

============================================================

Behind  Kasavubu's  Victory,  P.  3
How  U.S.  Weakened Betancourt  in  Venezuela,  Page  2;  On Those  National  Goals,  P.  2;  Rankin's  Legacy  P.  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  44DECEMBER  5,  1960
°<°'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
On  the  Norstad  Plan  to  Make  NATO  A  Nuclear  Power
The  growing  campaign to  make  NATO  "a  fourth  nuclear
power"   (it   would  really  be  the  fifth,  now  that  France  has
the   A-bomb)   is  a  prime  example  of   the   way  crucial  deci-
sions  are  brought  about  with  a  maximum  of   secrecy  and   a
minimum  of  public  consultation.    In  Britain,  Edward   Heath,
Minister  for  European  Affairs,   told  the  House  of  Commons
Nov.  28  the  British  government  had  not  been  consulted  be-
fore  Gen.  Norstad  unveiled  his  NATO  "atomic  pool"  plan
to   the  NATO   parliamentarians  in   Paris.     Here   the   study
report  by  Robert   B.  Bowie  on  which  the   Norstad   plan  is
supposedly  based  remains  a  classified  document.    Mr.  Bowie,
now  at  Harvard, where  he  prepared  the  report,  was  formerly
head   of   the   State  Department's   policy  planning   staff.      He
lives  and  works  in  that  little  closed  society  of   the  military
and  their  academic  adjutants   to  which  ordinary  mortals  are
denied   access,  and   where  traditional  democratic  safeguards
do  not  apply.
Every  Salesman's  Dream
The  result is  that  key  advisers of  the  incoming Administra-
tion  and  key members of  Congress  are  being  asked  to  line  up
for   the   plan   without  being   told   what   it   really   calls   for.
According  to  a  story  by  Murray  Marder   in  the   Washington
Post  Nov.  26,  an  unusual  last-minute  conference  was  held  in
New  York  the  night  before  by  Philip  J.  Parley,  special  assist-
ant  to  the  Secretary of  State  for  disarmament  and  atomic  en-
ergy,  with  Congressman  Chet  Holifield,  who  will  be chairman
of   the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  and   four   other
members  of  the  committee.    They  were  about  to  leave  on  a
two-week  tour  of  nuclear missile  bases  abroad  which  will  give
Gen.  Norstad  a  chance  to  "brief",   i.e.  to  indoctrinate  them.
Mr.  Parley  met  with  them  to  discuss  the  Administration  pro-
posal.    The  discussion  could  not  have  been  too  enlightening
since  it  appears  from  Mr.  Marder's  story  (1)  that  the  Joint
Committee  was  refused   permission  to  see  the  Bowie   report,
(2)   that  "not   even  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  has  had
any  document  placed  before  it"  and  (3)   that  the  plan   itself
is  not  only  still  secret  but  "some  of  its  operating  details  re-
main   to   be   agreed   upon   within   the   government."     Every
salesman  will  appreciate  the  advantages  of  being  allowed   to
sell  a  product  without  giving  the  customer  too  close  a  look.
The  headlines  in  last   Sunday's  New   York   Times    (Nov.
27)   gave   the  impression   that   the  NATO   parliamentarians
approved   the   Norstad   plan.     "Spaak   Endorses   Control   by
NATO  Over  Atom  Arms,"   said  the  headlines.    "Calls  Nor-
stad  Plan  Best  Way  to  Bolster  Alliance's  Defense  and  Unity.
Legislators  Approve."     The  truth   is  that  while  the  NATO
parliamentarians  agreed  that  the  NATO  nations  should   have
more  voice  in  the  use  of  nuclear  missiles   "they   declined   to
take steps  toward  making NATO a  nuclear  power  on  its  own"
12                                                                                                      17
Those  Ugly  Faces  Are  Our  Own
Much  was  said  in  the  campaign  of  Mr.  Elsenhower's
failure   to  exert   the   moral  power  of  his   office.     Mr.
Kennedy  was  to  provide  a  vigorous  new  voice  in  our
national   life.     But  the   President   and   the   President-
elect  are  equally  silent  on  the  ugly  situation  in  New
Orleans.    Mr.  Kennedy  talked  inspiringly  during   the
campaign  of  leading  us  all  on  a  crusade  to  a  new  fron-
tier.    The  most  important   frontier  in  our   society   is
the  establishment  of  the  Negro's   right   to  be  a  first
class   citizen,  and  of  his  children's  right   to  grow  up
without  the  stigma  of  compulsory  apartness.    This  is
also  our   most   dangerous  frontier,  and   Mr.  Kennedy
seems  loath  to  approach  it.   He  has  to  "live  with"  the
South,  as  the  practical  men around him  must  be  saying.
But  for  his  silence  and  his  palsied  arm,  we  who  are
white  are  all  to  blame.    The  President   and  the  Presi-
dent-elect  are  alike  prisoners  of  an  atmosphere  we  all
accept.    It   is  compounded  of   hopelessness   about   the
moral  imbecility which racism  has  created  in  the  South,
and  of  a  fundamental racial  indifference.   This  is  hap-
pening  to  black  men, not  to  us.   So we turn  easily  from
it   to  the  sports  pages.    Those  ugly   faces   screaming
"nigger   lover"  are  only  the  nightmarish   distortion  of
a  white  supremacy  from   which  we  all  benefit  and  in
which  we  all  more  or  less  acquiesce.    The  failure   is
not  just  Mr. Elsenhower's  or  Mr. Kennedy's.    It  is  ours.
We  dedicate  these  lines  in  sorrow  to  the  memory  of
Richard  Wright,  who has  just  died  in  Paris.
(Associated   Press  from   Paris,   Washington   Star  Nov.    27).
From   a  military  and   political   point   of   view,  the   Norstad
plan  raises  many  questions.     How,   for   example,   do  15  na-
tions  decide  when  to  pull  the  trigger?     How  will  this  be
giving  Western  Europe an  independent nuclear  deterrent when
the  U.S.  will  still  be  one  of  the  fifteen,  able  to  veto  NATO's
use  of  nuclear  arms ?
The  Norstad  plan  is a way to  get  around  reluctance  to  make
the   Germans   a  nuclear   power.     It   is  significant  that   only
Bonn  is  on  record  whole-heartedly  for  it.    This  would   give
the  German  troops  in  NATO  their  chance  to  train  in  the  use
of  tactical  and  strategic  nuclear  weapons,  supplied  by  the  U.S.
The  plan  is  favored  by  the  growing  missile  industry  in  our
own  country  which  sees  the  spread  of  these  monsters  as  the
guarantee  of  an  expanding  market,  and  by  our  simple-minded
military  who  figure  that  if  X  number  of  nuclear  weapons  are
a  deterrent,  then  several  times  that  many  will  be  that  much
greater  a  deterrent.    A  world  bristling  with  nuclear  missiles,
some  hidden  in  "hardened"   bases,  some  prowling  under  the
seas,  others  giddily  travelling  around  Europe  and  the  U.S.A.
on  railroad  cars  and  eventually  a  stockpile  of  them  in  orbit
overhead   is  their   idea  of  a  stable   universe.     The   Norstad
plan  is  a  phase  of  this  madness.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   December  5, 1960
Sackcloth   and  Ashes  Dept.
Dear  Izzy:   You  know  I  have  the  greatest   admiration
for   the  way  you  handle  legal   matters,   but  this  time
you  went  off  on  the  wrong  foot.    The  Chaunt  case  that
you  mentioned   [Weekly  of  NOT. 21]  was  not  a  deporta-
tion  case  and  was  not  unanimous.     Nor  was  the  issue
merely  one  of  the  distribution  of   leaflets.
The  fact  is  that  Chaunt  was  a  denaturalization   case.
The  denaturalization  was  sought  on  the  basis  of  Com-
munist  membership  and  failing   to  disclose  certain  ar-
rests.    It  is  true  that  one  of  these  arrests  had  to  do
with  the  distribution  of  leaflets,  but  there  were  others
as  well.    The  Court  of  Appeals  had  passed  only  on  the
failure   to  disclose  and  not  on  the   Communist   aspect
of  the  case.   The  Supreme   Court,  Justices  Clark,  Whit-
taker  and  Stewart  dissenting,  sent  the  case  back   for
consideration   of  the   Communist   issues.
Sincerely  yours,  Osmond  K.  Fraenkel
High  Inspirational  and  Lofty  Spiritual  Tone  Shows  Earlier  Misgivings  Baseless
A  National  Goals  Report  With  No  Taint  of  Economic  Planning
Those  with  the  patience  to   read  through   the   report  of
the  President's Commission  on  National  Goals  will  find  quite
a   few   gems.     One   of   our   favorites  is   the   Commission's
finding,  "we  should  be  highly   selective  in  our  space  objec-
tives  and  unexcelled  in  their  pursuit."    This  has  a  ring  of
high  cosmic exclusiveness.
As   a  newspaperman,  we  also  liked   the   tactful   way  the
Commission  hinted  that  maybe our  instruments  of  mass com-
munication  could  improve  their  communicating.    "Mass   cir-
culation  periodicals,"  the  report:  suggested,   "have  opportuni-
ties  beyond their  current performance."   It  was no  less tender
with  TV.     "Television,"   said  the  report   circumspectly,   "al-
though  it  has  improved,  can  do  better  still  in  communicating
serious  ideas."   This  should  spare  Gen.  Sarnoff's  feelings.
No  People  on Earth  Sees  More  Westerns
We  also  enjoyed   the  whipped  cream  phraseology  of   the
passage  which  says,  "The   American  people   remain   among
the  best  informed in  the  world,  but  their  sources  of  informa-
tion  must  steadily  be  enriched  to  cope  with  ever  more  com-
plex  problems."    We  hope  this  doesn't  mean fewer  Westerns.
Among  our   other   favorites   was  the   Commission's   stern
admonition,   "Special   interest   groups   must   operate   legiti-
mately,"  and  its  clarion call  "Knowledge  and  innovation must
be  advanced  on  every  front."    We   also  liked  the  down-to-
earth   quality   of   "We   must  use  available  manpower  more
efficiently";  the  oracular,  "The  way  to  preserve  freedom  is  to
live  it";   and  the  inspirational,  "Above  all,  Americans  must
demonstrate  in   every  aspect  of  their  lives  the   fallacy   of   a
purely  selfish  attitude—the  materialistic ethic."
The   idea  of  a  "goals"  commission  was  first  proposed   to
Mr.  Eisenhower  during  a  White  House  visit  the  evening  of
January  5,  1959,  just  before  the  annual  message,  by  Charles
H.  Percy  of  Bell  &  Howells,  Chicago.
Mr.  Eisenhower was enthusiastic but  his White  House  aides
soon  began  to  worry.    "The   trouble,"   as  Joseph  R.  Slevin,
national  economics  editor  of  the  New   York  Herald  Tribune
explained   (Jan.   26,   1959)    in   a  story  we  squirreled   away
at  the  time,  "lies  in  the  word  'goals'.    Presidential  advisers
don't  want  to  set  up  a  committee  that  would  establish  pre-
cise  goals  because  they  fear  the  next  step  would  be  economic
planning."     Indeed  the  Weekly  at  the  time  (Jan.  19,   1959)
had   already  hailed  the  idea  as  "A  first,  faint  step  in   this
direction"  and  the  national  executive  committee  of   the  So-
cialist  Party,  perhaps  with  tongue-in-cheek,  had   also  given
the  President's  proposal  a  comradely welcome.
As  one  worried  official  said  to  Mr.  Slevins,  "Suppose   the
committee  said  there  ought  to  be  100,000  new  schoolrooms
or  1,000,000  new  homes  a  year  and  then  they  weren't  built.
Why  everybody in  the  country  would  be  demanding  that  the
Federal  government  step  in  and  see to  it  that  they  get  built."
What,  indeed,  if  the  committee  went  further  on  this  danger-
ous  path  and  set  goals  for  steel  or  autos  or aluminum?
We  are  happy  to  report   these  anxieties  were  unfounded.
Mr.  Greenwalt of  du  Pont  and  Mr.  Pace of  General Dynamics,
flanked  by  such stalwarts as  Mr.  Meany of  the  AFL-CIO,  Mr.
Canham  of  the  Christian  Science  Monitor  and  General  Gruen-
ther  of  the  American  Red  Cross,  resisted  all  such crypto-Marx-
ist  temptations.   Nowhere  does the  report  even mention  goals
for  industry.   "The  economy,"  it  says with  shining  orthodoxy,
"should  grow  at  the  maximum  rate  consistent  with  primary
dependence  upon   free   enterprise.  .  .  ."    "Free  enterprise"
comes  first,  even  ahead  of  growth  and   progress.
How  Slippery  U.S.  Policy  oh  Trujillo  Undermined  Betancourt   in  Venezuela
'The   government   of  President   Romulo   Betancourt  sank
into  a   morass  of   inter-party  conflict   and  uncertainty  re-
garding   Cuba   and  Cuban   Premier  Fidel  Castro.    At   the
San  Jose  de  Costa  Rica  Foreign  Ministers'  Conference  of
the  Organization   of  Latin  American   States  (OAS)   in  Au-
gust,  Foreign  Minister  Ignacto  Luis  Arcayo  had  refused  to
cooperate  with  the  coalition  government's  policy  of  cool-
ness  toward  the  Cuban  regime.  .  .  .  Welcomed  as  a  hero
by  his  party,  the  Union  Republicans  Democratica  (URD),
and by other  pro-Castro factions,  Arcaya  tendered his  resig-
nation  as  Foreign  Minister.  .  .  .  [His  party  has  since  left
the   3-party   coalition    behind   Betancourt-IFS].
"At  the  OAS  conference  in  San  Jose,  Venezuela  partici-
pated  in  what  many  considered  to  be  a  barter  deal  with  the
U.S.    In  exchange  for  cooperation  in  the  Venezuelan  cam-
paign   against  Dominican   dictator   Trujillo,   the  Venezuelan
government,  apparently  very   much  against  the  will  of  its
constituency,  went   along  with  the  U.S.-inspired  censure  of
the  Cuban  regime.    Betancourt's  shaky  position  was   made
even  more  precarious  in  September  when  the  Department  of
Agriculture  announced  that,  instead  of  participating  in  the
economic   boycott  of  the  Dominican  Republic,  it   would  in-
crease  its  sugar  purchases  from  there  to  232,000  tons.  .  .  .
"The  Venezuelan   government   sent  an  immediate  note  of
protest  to  Washington.  .  .  . The  U.S.  State  Dept.  explained
in  its  answer  that  it  had  acted  in  accordance  with  the  word-
ing  of  the  San  Jose  declaration,  which  referred  only  to  the
breaking  of  diplomatic  relations  and  the  ceasing  of  arms
sales  to  the Dominican  Republic.  .  . . The Venezuelan  reac-
tion  was  that  the  U.S.  had  found  a  legal  loophole  to  avoid
carrying  out  the  spirit  of  the  San  Jose  meeting.   President
Betancourt,   who  had  already   lost  a  competent  and  states-
manlike  foreign  minister  and  had  come   dangerously  close
to  losing  control  of  his  government  as  a result  of  his  gamble
on  U.S.  cooperation,  made  no  official  comment."
—Hispanic  American  Report,  Stanford    Univ.  Nov.   1960
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  5, 1960
Business  As  Usual  in  Katanga
"Despite   the   widespread   chaos   that   crippled   the
Congo   after   independence  arrived   last   June   30   the
company's   [Union  Miniere   dii   Haut   Katanga]   mines,
processing   plants,  smelters  and  hydro-electric  instal-
lations  have kept  on functioning  smoothly  .  .  .  only  two
days'  operations  were  lost  last  July.    The  rest  of  the
time  the  mining  and  smelting  continued  on  a  normal
three-shifts-a-day  basis,  six  days  a  week.  .  .  ."
—"Belgian   Mines   Still    Thriving    in   the   Congo",
Canadian  Press  dispatch  from  Elisabethville,  Katanga
province,  New   York   Herald-Tribune,   November   27.
How  the  State  Dept.  Is  Working  for  a  Belgian  Big  Business   Take-Over in  the  Congo
Behind  That  Vote  to  Seat  Kasavubu's  Delegates  at  the   UN
A  series  of  recent  events,  most  of  which  got  little publicity
in  the  American  press,  indicates  clearly  enough  just  what  is
our  government's  policy  in  the   Congo.     One   item  was  the
visit  paid  Nov.   21  by  our  Ambassador  Timberlake   to  Elisa-
bethville,  capital  of  the  secessionist  Katanga,  where  he  was
welcomed   by  its  self-proclaimed  President   Moise   Tshombe.
"He  is  the  first  foreign  ambassador  to  visit  Katanga,"  the  AP
dispatch   from   Elisabethville*  noted   significantly   "since   the
provincial  regime  announced  secession  from  the  Congo,  July
11."    This  will  encourage the  movement to  separate from  the
Congo  its  richest  territory  where  (as  may  be  seen  from   the
adjoining  box)   Union  Miniere  du  Haut  Katanga  in  which
the  Rockefellers  are  interested  is  doing  business  as  usual.
Visa  Control  as  UN   Control
A  second  item,  indicating  how  far  we  are  prepared  to  go
to  get  our  way  in  the  Congo,  was  the  refusal  of  the  U.S.  to
give  Thomas  Kanza,  Lumumba's  delegate  to  the  United  Na-
tions,  a  visa  to  come here  for  the  General  Assembly  debate  on
the  Congo.  The  U.S.  delegation  at  the  UN  explained   (accord-
ing  to an AP  dispatch,  Washington  Post, Nov.  12)  that  Kanza
had  made  his  request  for  a  visa  when  Kasavubu  flew  to  New
York   "but   it  was  not   in   proper   form."     Kanza   was   the
Congo's  spokesman  before  the  Security  Council  last   summer.
A  third  and  the  most  revealing  item  of  all  was,  of  course,
the  swift  reaction  of  the  State  Department   to  the   release  of
the   Dayal   report   and   the   accompanying   correspondence   in
which  the  authorities  of  Belgium  and  the  Katanga   rejected
Hammarskjold's  demand  for  the  removal  of  Belgian  military
and  civilian  advisers  who  were  disrupting  UN   operations  in
the  Congo.    The  State  Department  release  of  Nov.   4  saying
that  it  had  "every  confidence  in  the  good  faith  of  Belgium"
disregarded  the  evidence  of  Belgium's  take-over   (see  box  be-
low  for  another  picture  of  what  the  Belgians  are  doing)  and
undercut  UN  authority in  the  Congo.
A  fourth  item was the  earliest  indication  of  U.S.  displeasure
with  the  UN  operation  in  the  Congo.    It  concerned  the  cele-
bration  held  by  UN  troops  in  Leopoldville  to  mark  the   15th
anniversary  of  the  UN:   Our   Ambassador   and  those  of   the
* York,  Pa.,  Gazette & Daily,  Nov.  22, the  only  place  I  saw
this  AP dispatch.
other  Western   powers  boycotted  the  ceremony   (according   to
an  AP  dispatch  in  the  New   York   Herald-Tribune   Oct.   25)
"to  mark  their  displeasure  with  current  UN   policy."
On  the  eve  of  Kasavubu's  appearance  at  the  UN,  the   U.S.
decided  to  back  him  because  the  UN  plan  was  to  bring  back
the  Congolese  parliament,  and  because  we  feared   parliament
would  restore  Lumumba.    Kasavubu  was  favored  because  he
"has  been  generally  backing  Col.  Mobutu"  and  we  "tend  now
to  favor  a  strong   executive"   (all   this  was  spelled   out  in  a
background   briefing  reported  by  John   Hightower,  the   AP's
State  Dept.  man  in  the  Washington  Star  Nov.  6).    In  plain
language,  we  prefer  a  military  dictatorship   in  the  Congo.
However   ill-informed  the  U.S.  public  may  be,  all  this  is
clearly  understood  by  the  African  nationalist  elite.    We  man-
aged   to   split   the   African   bloc   and   obtain   enough    French
African   votes  to  seat  the  Kasavubu  delegation   at  the   UN,
though  over  the  opposition   of  the  European  and  Asian  neu-
trals.     Ireland   and   Sweden  voted   against   us,  as  did   India,
Indonesia   and   Ceylon.     Countries   as  friendly   to   the    U.S.
as  Canada,   Israel,   Pakistan,   Liberia,  Mexico  and   Venezuela
abstained  while  Nigeria   declined  to  participate  after   appeal-
ing  to  the  Assembly to  take  no  action  until  the  UN   concilia-
tion  commission  could  reach  the  Congo.    The  final  vote  was
50  to  32  with  14  abstentions  and  three  countries  not   partici-
pating,  a  thin  victory.    The  price  of  it  was  loss  of  faith  in
the  U.S.  as  a  champion  of  constitutional  government   and  in
the  UN  as  a  trustworthy  friend  of  the  colonial  peoples.    As
Mr.  Aw  of  Mali  said  during  the  debate,   "The   Congo  is  be-
coming  the  tombstone  of  our  hopes."
A  Vivid  Associated  Press  Report  on  Why  the  Belgians  Want  the  UN  Out
"A  new  and  formidable  military  challenge  faces  the  UN
in  the  Congo.   Exasperated  UN  officials  say  the  challenge
comes  mainly  from  Belgian  officers  who  have  rejoined  Con-
golese  army units.  . .  . The Belgian  officers—like  their  civil-
ian  colleagues  in   the   Congolese   government   offices—have
two  main  objectives:
"1. To  prevent  at  all  cost  the  return  to  power  of  former
Premier   Patrice   Lumumba   who   leans   toward  the   Com-
munists.    2.  To  preserve  as  far  as  possible  the  privileged
position  of  Belgian  commercial  interests  in  the   Congo.
"The  presence  of  the  UN  force  is  a  threat  to  both  these
objectives.   The  UN  mission  is  bound by  its  charter  to  up-
hold  parliamentary government.    In  the  nation's  political
turmoil  this  inevitably  favors  Mr.  Lumumba.    And  among
all  the  squabbling  political  leaders,  only  Mr.  Lumumba   is
likely  to  upset  the  80-year  old  Belgian  commercial  hegem-
ony.  .  .  .  Top  UN  officials  say  this  opposition  [by  'Belgian
and  Western  interests']  seeks  to  build  up  the  Congolese
army  as  the backing  for  a  pro-Belgian  puppet  regime.  .  .  .
Prominent  UN  officials  say  it  [the  army]  is  held   together
only  with  the  help  of  Belgian  officers  and  money  provided
by  Belgian  firms  operating  in  the  Congo.  .  .  .
"All  normal  tax  collection  has  broken  down  in  the  Congo
and  Belgian  firms  claim  they  are  within their  rights  in  con-
tributing   equivalent  amounts  to   the   upkeep  of   Mobutu's
pro-Western  regime.
"A  month  ago,  before  the  Belgian  interests  had  organ-
ized  their  military aid,  the  UN  spent  more  than  $60,000  to
pay   the   overdue   wages   of   Col.  Mobutu's  unruly  troops.
'But  never  again,'  one  senior  UN  official  said  ruefully."
1  2  *
—Michael  Goldsmith  from  Leopoldville,  Associated  Press  dispatch,  Washington   Evening  Star,  Oct. 26
1    7  •.•
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December 5, 1960
What  the  Newspapers   Forgot  to  Mention  in  Their  Obituaries  of  John  Rankin
How  The  Racist   from   Mississippi  Saved  the  Un-American  Committee
Two  things  were  missing  in  the   newspaper  obituaries  of
former  Congressman Rankin of  Mississippi.   One  was  a  clear
appraisal  of  his  peculiar  radicalism.    This  mixed  attacks  on
Wall  Street  and  the  power  trust  (he  helped   George   Norris
establish  the TVA)  with  the  kind  of  attacks on  Negroes,  Jews
and  liberals, never  before  (or   since)   heard  in  the  House  of
Representatives.    This   mixture  of   Anti-Semitism  and   lower
middle   class   radicalism  was   a   home-grown  variant   of   the
same  ideological  stew  served up  by  Hitler.
The  other  missing  item  was  mention  of  Rankin's  greatest
parliamentary   achievement—the   establishment   of   the   Un-
American   Activities  Committee   as  a  standing  committee  of
the  House  just  when  it  seemed  to  be  on  its  way  out.    Perhaps
it  might  have  seemed  untactful  to  mention  that  these  profes-
sional  snoopers  after  un-Americanism  owed  their  postwar  ex-
istence  to   about   as  clearly   un-American   a  Congressman   as
ever  sat in  the  House.
When  Martin  Dies  Retired
The  story  may  be  found  told  in  full  in  Prof.  Robert   K.
Carr's  book  on  the  Un-American  committee.    The  committee
had   grown   increasingly  inactive  during   the  war  years.     In
1944,   its  chairman,  Martin  Dies,   announced   that  he  would
not  stand  for  redaction.    Since  the  committee  was  a  one-man
show,  and  had  made  itself   notorious  in  the  prewar   period
by  becoming  so  obviously  an  anti-New  Deal  sounding  board,
the  retirement  of   its  chairman  seemed  to  signal  its  demise.
Normally  a  new  resolution  would   have  been  required   to
continue  the   committee  during   the   new   Congress   and   the
chances  were  that  such  a  resolution  would   be  buried  by  the
leadership  in  the  Rules  committee  which  was  then  headed  by
a  liberal,  Sabath  of   Chicago.    Rankin,  however,  outsmarted
the  leadership.   When  the  Congress  met  on  January  3,   1945,
and  Chairman  Sabath  had  offered  the  usual  resolution   declar-
ing  the  rules  of  the  previous  Congress   in   effect   during   the
new,   Rankin  moved   an   amendment   making  Un-American
Activities  a  standing  committee  of  the   House.
Since the  rules  had  not  yet been  adopted  and  no  committees
The  New  American   Decalogue
"Americans,  at  present,  'obsessed'  with  freedom  and
a  desire  to  extend it,  are  being  deluded  by  'cheap  defi-
nitions'  of   the  way   to  do  so,  a  theologian  said  here
yesterday.
"Current  commandments  for  the  preservation  of  free-
dom,  the  Rev. Dr.  Listen  Pope,  Dean  of  Yale  Divinity
School  said,  might  go  like  this:
"Thou  shalt  manufacture  hydrogen  bombs,  and  they
will  keep  you  free.  .  .  .  Thou  shalt  suppress  the Com-
munist  in  thy  midst.  .  .  .  Thou  shalt  keep  the  alien
from  the  shores  by  immigration bills.  .  .  .
"Thou  shalt  stir  up  suspicion  and  fear  in  the  land,
that  men  may  be  afraid  to  voice  unpopular convictions.
.  . .  Thou shalt  require loyalty  oaths  to  insure that pub-
lic   employees   and   university  professors   are   either
patriots  or  liars.  .  .  .  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods
before  free  enterprise.  .  .  ."
—Washington  Post,  Nov.  22
were  yet  functioning,   the  Rankin  amendment   could   not  be
referred  to  committee  for  hearings  but  had  to  be  voted  on  at
once.   It  was first defeated  134 to  146 against  the  amendment.
But  when  Rankin  asked,  and  obtained  the  requisite  one-fifth
of  the  membership  for,  a  record  vote,  the  amendment  passed
by  207 to  186 with  40  members  not  voting.
The  vote  was  the  first  victory  in  the  postwar   Congress  of
the  coalition  between  Republicans   and   Southern    Democrats.
The  Democrats  were  split,  150  against  the  committee  and  70
for  it.    The  Republicans  were  split  the  other  way,  34  against
the  Committee  and  137  for  it.     (One   Progressive  and  one
Farmer-Laborite  in  the  House  also   voted   against   the   Com-
mittee).    Of  the  70  Democrats   for  the  Committee,   all  but
7  were  Southern   Democrats.
Some  day  when  there  is  a  cleaner  atmosphere  in  the  coun-
try,  the  Committee  may be  abolished  by the  same  tactic which
Rankin  used  to  establish  it—an  amendment  to  the  rules  on
opening  day  when  it  cannot  be  shunted  off  for  burial  in  the
Rules  committee.    But  that  day is  still a  long way off.
NEWS  FLASH  AT   PRESS TIME:  A  National  Conference  an  Reform  of  the  Rules  to  End Minority  Control  of  Congress  will  be  held  in  Wash-
ington  Dec.  28.    Organizations  wishing  to  take  port  should  wire  the  coordinator,  Wm.  Taylor,  Americans  for  Democratic  Action,
1314  Connecticut  Avenue,  Washington,    D.C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ....................................
City   ........................................
12/5/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (€  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street  ........................................................................................
City    ..........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tes  D    No  Q
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly.   Entered u Second  Clan  Hatter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the Act  of  March  »,  1879.    Foot-dated  Monday!  but  published  every  Thur*.
day  except  the  la*t  two  Thursdays  of  Angnat  and  December  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W..  Washington.  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  In  the  U.  S.:  6  In
Canada;   HO  elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rates:   $15  to   Europe;    $20   to   brad.   Asia   and   Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED