I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960oct10.pdf

============================================================

More  on  Rockefellers   in  the  Congo,  P.  2
Humphrey's  Own  Nuclear   Test  Talks  Report   Rebuts  His  June   Deadline   Proposal,   See  Page  4
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  36
OCTOBER   10,   1960
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why   the  Balubas  and  the  Luluas  Cannot  Co-Exist
Like  many  of  our  readers we  have  been  appalled  from  time
to  time  by  news  stories  out  of  the  Congo  which  tell  about
savage  outbursts  of  tribal  warfare  between  the  Balubas  and
the  Luluas.   We  have  often  wondered  idly  why—now  that
the  Congo  is  free—their  chiefs  cannot  meet  and  shake  hands.
African   scholars  informed  us  this  displays  a  typical  white
man's  ignorance.  The  Balubas and  the  Luluas are  divided by
grave  differences,  and  cannot  easily be  reconciled.   The  Balu-
bas  feel  it  is  difficult  to  co-exist  with  a  tribe  like  the  Luluas
who  do  not  believe  in  ju-ju,  while  the  Luluas  feel  it  a  duty
to  liberate  the  bush  from  a  tribe  which  seeks  by  using  coral
shells as medium of  exchange to monopolize trade  in  cows and
12-year  old  girls.    Both  the  Balubas  and  the  Luluas  regard
themselves  as  peace-loving  but  both  are  convinced  that   peace
will  not  really  be  secure until  the  other  is  exterminated.    We
are  told  that  this  mutual  suspicion  has  been  exacerbated  re-
cently  when  a  Baluba  was  caught  peeping  from  a  tree  top  at
the  sacred  puberty  rites  of  the  Luluas.    The  Balubas  claimed
that  in  carrying  out  this  aerial  surveillance  they  were  acting
in  the  common  interest  of  the  entire  Congo  since  Lulua  boys
are  taught  at  these  rites  to  use  poisoned  arrows  for  surprise
attack.   Thereupon  a Lulua  leader  angrily told  a  Baluba leader
to  his  face  that  he  was  fit  only to  mind  the  children  with  the
women while the  rest of  the men went  antelope  hunting.  After
so  statesmanlike  an  utterance,  every  right  thinking tribesman
on  both  sides  felt  that  there  was  nothing  to  do  but  prepare
for  war to the  death.
African  Blacks  and  European   Pinks
I  might have dismissed  this  background  information as  silly
primitive  stuff  were  it not that I  recalled  a  recent  night  session
of  the  Security  Council  on  the  Congo  crisis which  I  attended.
Looking  at  the  scene  through  the  eyes of  the  black  men  from
the  new  States  waiting  to  be  heard  by  the  Council,  I  realized
for  the  first  time  how  alike  Mr.  Zorin  and  Sir  Patrick  Dean
and  James  Wadsworth  must  look  to  the  new  representatives
from  Africa.    All  three—Zorin,  Dean  and  Wadsworth—had
high   balding  foreheads  and   pinkish   skins,  wore  the   same
clothes,  seemed  unmistakably and  interchangeably  of  the  same
race.    An   African   Baluba  fresh   from   the  bush,  or   even  a
Lulua  who  had  been  to  Oxford,  might  have  been  forgiven  if
he  wondered  for  a  moment  just  what  was  the  burning  differ-
ence  that  could  bring these  pink-faced Europeans  to  the  brink
of  mutual destruction.   I  touch  on  this  with  no  implication  of
racial  inferiority.   It  takes  more  than  one  generation  fully  to
appreciate  the  nuances  of  a  theology  which  makes  mass  in-
cineration  of  the  atheistical  excusable,  or  to  grasp  an  ideology
which  'teaches  that  millions  of  fellow  workers  may  justly  be
liberated  by  thermonuclear  intercontinental  ballistic   bombard-
Kennedy  As  Silly  As  Herter  on  Ghana
A   few   days    after    Secretary    Herter    was   foolish
enough   to  slur  Ghana  and  its   leader   Nkrumah  as  in
the   Soviet    orbit,   Senator   Kennedy   made   a   foreign
policy  speech  in  Syracuse.    He  had  a  choice  of  alter-
natives  in  dealing  with  the  incident.    Like  the  British,
he   could   have   deplored   this   as   another   example  of
clumsy   diplomacy.     He  chose   instead   to   agree   with
Mr.   Herter's   evaluation    and   add   Ghana   to   the   list
of   countries   where   (in  Kennedy's  words)   "the   cause
of   freedom   is  in  serious  trouble."    To  say   that   "the
cause   of   freedom"   is   threatened    in   Ghana   because
Nkrumah   took  a  neutralist  line  at  the  UN  will  seem
to  Africans   another  example  of  the  vapid  oversimplifi-
cations   which   make   it   so   difficult   to   talk   political
sense  in  the  USA.     Other  nations  in  Kennedy's   alarm-
ist  list  included,  of  course,  Cuba  (on  which  he  is  hope-
less)  and  Laos.   On the  latter,  we  suggest  that  readers
compare   the   Senator's   Nellie-the-Cloak-Model    melo-
drama  about  "the  tiny  nation  of  Laos  .  .  .  struggling
to  keep   its   head   above   a   Communist   tide"  with   the
insights  into   Laotian  events  given  the  UN  that  same
day  (see  page  3)  by  Prince  Sihanouk  from  neighboring
Cambodia.     Since  the  Senator  is   supposed   to  be  ad-
vised  by  Stevenson  and  Bowles,  we   don't   know   why
he  sounds  so  much  like  Hearst  and  Luce.
1  0
ment.    Even  after  an  education  in  the  West,  the  Baluba  or
Lulua  may  miss  all  our  higher  spiritualities  and  see  in   U.S.
and   U.S.S.R.  only   two   industrial   societies   mass  producing
standardized   mentalities   and  alike  intolerant  of   those   sus-
pected  of  deviating  from  them.    It  takes  longer   absorption
in  our  ways  to  understand  why  it  is  impossible  for  a  Chris-
tian  gentleman   like  Mr.  Eisenhower  or  a  devoted   Marxist-
Leninist   like   Mr.   Khrushchev   to   meet   and   shake  hands
without  first  exacting  some  humiliating  abasement  from  the
other  even  to  stop  the  drift  to  war.    It  is  from  the  ranks  of
the  newer,  less  developed,  in  some ways less  civilized  countries
that   this  unthinking   demand   for   a  meeting   between   them
comes.
So  we  go  to  press  here  in  Washington   with   some  equa-
nimity  as  we  await  the  outcome  of  the  vote  in  the  UN  Gen-
eral   Assembly   on   the   resolution   of   the   five   Afro-Asian
neutrals  still  pressing  for  an  Eisenhower-Khrushchov  meeting
both   have  rejected.    It  may  comfort   Mr.  Nehru  and   Mr.
Nkrumah   and   their   colleagues   to  realize  that   if   they  have
trouble  plumbing  the  abyss  which  divides  us  from  the  Rus-
sians,  we  are  equally  unclear  as  to  just  why  Luluas  continue
to  massacre  Balubas,  or  indeed  why  the  heirs  of  Gan'dhi  are
prepared  to  make  war  over  an  obscure  place  called   Kashmir.
Mr.  Eisenhower  and  Mr.  Khrushchov  are  only  honoring  man-
kind's  most  cherished  behavior   pattern.
1   4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  10, 1960
The  Financial  Shenanigans  Surrounding  the   Congo's  Stock  in  Union  Miniere
More  Light  on  the  Rockefeller   Interest  in  the  Congo  Struggle
If  the  Rockefeller  family  were  not  a  sacred  cow  of   U.S.
politics   and   journalism,  the   Democrats   might   be   making
capital  of  the  Rockefeller interest  in  the  struggle  now  going
on  in  the  Belgian  Congo  over  the  future  of  Katanga.   We
called  attention  in  our  issue  of  Sept.  26 to  the  fact  that  the
Rockefellers   had   been  buying   stock   in   Union  Miniere   du
Haul  Katanga,  one of  the  world's  largest  mining   companies
which  dominates  the  province  of  Katanga.
We   have   since   turned   up   some   additional   background
on  the  Rockefeller  interest.    Union  Miniere  was  formed  in
1906   by  a   combination   of   Belgian   and   British   interests.
The  British-  entered  the  picture  through   a  company  called
Tanganyika   Concessions,  Ltd.,   "which  had  been  organized,"
according  to  the   Wall  Street  Journal   (Jan.   13,  1959)   "as
part  of  Cecil  Rhodes'  scheme  to  gain   control   of   Congolese
mineral   resources."
Their  Debut  in  Africa
In   1950,  the   Bank  of  England   sold   1,667,961  shares  in
TCL  to  an  Anglo-Belgian  group  which  in  turn  sold  600,000
shares  to  "an  American  group."   "It  is  of  interest,  also  of
importance,  to  note,"  The  Times  (London)  reported  Nov.  3,
1950, "that the  International  Basic  Economy Corporation  and
Mr.  David   Rockefeller   are   among  those  associated  in  this
purchase,  for  the  corporation  is  a  highly  important   under-
taking,   formed   by  the   Rockefeller  family  interests,  which
has  so  far   confined   its  activities  to   South  America.   This
is,  in  fact,  the  first  time  that  it  has  turned  to   Africa."
On  February  ?„  1959,  just  one  month  after   the   outbreak
of  the  disorders   in  Leopoldville  which  led  to  the  grant  of
independence  for   the   Congo,  David  Rockefeller  was   being
received   in  Leopoldville  by  the   Belgian   Governor-General.
Rockefeller  was  in  Africa  under  the  sponsorship  of  the   U.S.
Council   on   Foreign   Relations.     Rockefeller  went   to   tour
the  Inga,  contemplated site  of  a  vast  $9 billion  hydro-electric
development,  accompanied by  John  Watts,  head  of  the  Afri-
can   division   of   the   Rockefellers'  Chase  Manhattan   Bank,
and   William   Burden,   a   former   U.S.   Assistant   Secretary
of  Commerce.  Rockefeller went on from  the  Congo to  Johan-
nesburg,  South  Africa,  where he  called  the  opening of  a  new
branch   of   Chase   Manhattan   indication   of   the    "confidence
we   feel   in  the   economic  potential   of   South   Africa    (New
York   Times,  Feb.  8  and  11,  1959).
In  addition  to  their  holdings  in  Tanganyika   Concessions,
the   Rockefellers   have  been  acquiring  a   direct  interest   in
Union  Miniere.    In  a  study  of  Union  Miniere  and  its  inter-
locking  Tanganyika   Concessions   published   by   the   London
Observer  (July  10),  that  paper  reported,  "There  is  an  even
bigger  fish  with  an  interest  in  both  companies. The  Belgians
have  just  brought  off  an  exchange  whereby  the  Rockefeller
holding  in  U.M.H.K.  was  swapped  for   shares  in   a  Congo
finance company,  thus  transforming it  in  effect  into  a  port-
folio  investment  in  U.M.H.K. without  possibilities  of  control.
For   the   Belgians,  this   means  the   heaven-sent   chance  of
American  investment  without  strings;  it  is  said  even  now
What  de  Gaulle  Feared
"PARIS—President  Charles  de Gaulle fears  a  Korea-
type  war  will  engulf  Negro  Africa  unless  the  Western
powers  scotch  the  attempt  to  detach  Katanga  province
from  the new  Republic  of the Congo.  . . .
"In  General  de  Gaulle's  eyes,  the  Belgians  court .an
even   graver   disaster   than   has   already   happened  if
they  believe  that   they  can  sever   Katanga   from   the
rest  of  the  Congo and  maintain it  as  a  sort  of economic
redoubt  controlled  by  their  big  private  interests."
—Washington  Sunday  Star,  July   31
"We  have  got  to  be  ready  to  fight  for  it   [freedom]
whether  it  is  in  Korea  or  Hungary  or   Congo."
—Nelson  Rockefeller   (TV   Open  Hearing,  Sept.  4)
that  Rockefeller  buying  is  putting  a  floor  under  the   price
of   U.M.H.K.    For   the   Rockefellers   and   anyone  else   with
a  long  purse  and  strong  nerves,  this  may  yet  be  a  brilliant
speculation.   The  ore  is  magnificent,  and  so  is  the  organ-
ization;  the  only  doubt  is  political."
The  key  political  question,  as  we  pointed  out  in  our  issue
of   Sept.   26,  revolves   around  the   fate   of  the   stock   which
the  Belgian  Congo  long  held  in  Union  Miniere.   This  stock
interest  goes  back to  the  days  when  Belgian  King  Leopold  II
exploited  the  Congo  as  his  private  property.    He  set  up  a
company  called  the   Comite  Special  du  Katanga   to  develop
the  mineral  riches  of  Katanga.  Two-thirds   of  the  stock  was
assigned  to  the  Congo "Free  State"  as  it  was  called.  When
world-wide  outcry  against  the  brutality  with  which Leopold
exploited  the  natives  forced  him  in   1910  to  turn   his   pos-
session  over  to  Belgium,  the  Belgian  Congo  State  retained
this  stock  interest.
CSK  in  turn  was  the  largest  single  stockholder  in  Union
Miniere,  having   been  the   corporate   vehicle  through   which
Leopold  in  1906  had  formed  Union  Miniere  in  concert  with
Cecil  Rhodes'  Tanganyika   Concessions.
"When  independence  became  inevitable,"   said  an  account
in  the  Washington  Sunday  Star   (July   31),   "the   Belgians
decided  not  to  let  these  profits  fall  into  the  hands  of  their
native   successors.    Thus  the  CSK  was  dissolved  last   year,
and  a  new  deal  was  negotiated  in  Brussels. ...  It  was
agreed  that  the  new  government  would  keep  control  over
22.5 percent  of  Union Miniere  [and  certain  other  companies].
.  .  .  That   seemed  fair   enough,  but  the  Belgians   made  a
mental   reservation.     It   was   not   specified   whether   those
assets  would  be  transferred   to  the  central   Congo  govern-
ment  or  to  the  provincial  government  of  the  Katanga.   To-
day,  the  U.M.  and  the  other  firms  involved  affirm  that  they
mean,   of   course,   the   Katanga   government.    That   is   the
basis  on  which  they  are  now  backing  plans  for  a   secession
of  the  Katanga.  They  found  themselves  an  ally  in  the  person
of   Moise  Tshombe."
The  Kind  of  "Free  Enterprise" Union  Miniere  Seeks  to  Preserve  in  Katanga
"The  whole  Katanga  is,  in  fact,  a  'company  town.'  Union     colonization.
Miniere  owns  the  electric  generating  plant,  the  chemical
industry  and  through  interlocking  directorates  is  in   close
association   with   the   Compagnie   du   Chemins   de   Fer   du
Bas  Congo  au  Katanga  which  has  a  monopoly  of  all  rail-
roads  in  the  area.
"Free   enterprise  in   the   Katanga   and   in   the   Belgian
Congo  generally  does  not  go  much  beyond  retail  trade  and
a  few  manufacturing  service  industries  of  local  scope,  and
one   of   the   bitterest   controversies  now  going  on   in   the
Congo   and   in   Brussels   is   the   question  of   mass   white
."The   small   colonials—planters,   farmers,   traders,   mer-
chants,  and  small  manufacturers—want   the  doors  thrown
wide  open  to  white  settlers.   The  great  firms  are  opposed
to  it.   They  want  black   labor,   not  white.   They   see  the
white  man  as  an  elite  class  of  managers,  technicians  and
leaders.    No  man  in  the  Congo—black  or  white—has  any
vote.   And  the  companies are  afraid  that  white  mass col-
onization   would   inevitably  lead  to   a  demand   for   unions,
elections,  free   enterprise.    They  frankly   say  they  do  not
want  any  'poor  white  trash'  in  the   Congo."
-N.Y.   Herald   Tribune,  Special   Sunday   Supplement   on  Belgium,  Feb.  15, 1S5S
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  10, 1960
Lifting  the  Curtain  on  the  Western  Intrigue  Behind  the  Fighting  in  Laos
Cambodia's   Ruler  at  the  UN  Eloquently  Voices  Neutral  Hopes  and  Fears
Though  given  slight  attention  by  our  press  the  impor-
tant   speech   for   the   neutrals   at   the   General   Assembly
Sept.   29  was   not   Macmillan's   but   the   eloquent   appeal
made   by  Prince  Sihanouk   of   Cambodia, particularly   for
the  new  light   it   threw  on  the  crisis  in  Laos.   We  give
excerpts   from  it  here:
ON  THE "LITTLE"  ARMS  RACE:  "'Out-moded'  conventional
weapons  are  .  .  .  distributed   with  touching  generosity  to
countries  courted by various imperialisms.  . . . This  secondary
aspect  of  the  arms  race ...  is  in  fact  the  aspect  which
is  the  cause  of  growing  concern  among  our  people.   Today,
when   the   great   Powers   speak   of   disarmament,   it   would
seem  that  they  think  primarily  in  terms  of  nuclear  weapons,
and  that  they  do  not  attach   sufficient   importance  to  these
obsolete  toys  which  were  only  responsible  for  the   annihila-
tion  of  a  few  tens  of  millions  of  people  during  the  Second
World  War.  .  .  .  What  we beg of  them  is  to  renounce this
arms  race,  to  renounce the  arming  of  the  small  and medium-
sized  countries,  to  renounce the  moral  armament  of  peoples,
which  seek  only  to  live  in  peace,  by  trying  to  convince  them
to  take  part   in  an   anti-communist   or   an    anti-imperialist
struggle   and  thus   killing   each   other   under   these   false
pretexts."
ON   ADMITTING  CHINA:   "While   small  nations  numbering
1, 2 or  5 million people,  such  as  ours,  sit  in  our  Organization,
it  seems  senseless  and  tragic  that  the  most  densely  popu-
lated  nation  of  the  world,  and  one  of  the   most   deserving
should  still  be  treated  as  a  pariah.  .  .  .  Certain  critics of
China  regularly  oppose  its  admission  to  the  United  Nations.
They   justify   their   obstruction   by  referring   to   the   Tibet
'affair'  and  the  border  differences  between  India  and  China.
Yet  India,  the  country  primarily   concerned  .  .  .   remains
convinced  of  the  necessity  of  admitting  China.  .  .  .  Have
these   adamant  critics  ever   realized  that   certain   members
of  the  UN  are  very  far  from  following  a  proper  cburse  as
regards   their  weaker   neighbors   and  has  it   ever  occurred
to them that these  nations  are  unworthy of sitting  among us ?
ON   INTRIGUE  IN  LAOS:   "Laos  certainly   does  not   deserve
a  situation  in  which  certain   foreign  agents  or  rulers  cyn-
ically  and  ruthlessly   sacrifice  Laos  on  the  altar  of  an  anti-
communist   psychosis,   and   favor   secession,   coldly   contem-
plating  the  abandonment of  the  northern  part  of the  country
to  communism  and  the  creation  of  a  so-called   anti-commu-
nist  bastion  in  the  south,  a  south  which  will  prove  to  be
only  an  illusion.   I  can tell  these  strategists  that  their  plan
for   division  is   doomed   to   failure   because   South   Laos   is
just  as  susceptible  to  the  infiltrations  of  the  Pathet  Lao  as
South  Vietnam  is  to  the  Viet  Minh."
FOR  NEUTRAL'BUFFER  ZONE:  "Cambodia  believes  it  would
be  in  the  general  interest  to  create   a.  neutralized  zone  made
up  of  Cambodia and  Laos  .  .  .  the  two  blocs  by  common
accord   would   agree  to  ...       avoid  any  further   rivalry  in
Sihanouk  Opposes  Khrushchov  Plan
"I  feel  it  useful   to  set  forth  the  position  of  Cam-
bodia   regarding  the   proposal   submitted   by  Premier
Khrushchov  that  the  Secretary  General's  post  be  re-
placed  by  an  executive  board  of  three  members,  rep-
resenting   the   Western   bloc,   the   socialist   camp   and
finally   the   neutralist  camp.    This   is   an   interesting
proposal  but  we  do  not  share  the  views  of  the  head
of   the  Soviet  Government  for   the  following  reasons.
We  feel  that  we  should  avoid  having  our Organization
split  up  into  rival  camps,  for  such  a  break-up  of  our
Organization  would  prevent  our  United  Nations  from
fully   playing   its   proper  role,   particularly  of   being
the  sole  guarantee  of   the  survival   and  independence
of  the  small  nations.   To  extend  this  division  into  the
Secretariat  might  well  make  the  Secretariat  ineffectual.
"On  the  contrary, it  seems  to  us  that  the  Secretariat
as  conceived at  the  present  time,  headed  by  a  strictly
neutral  personality,  standing  above  faction  and  pres-
sure,   is   the  best   possible   guarantee  of  impartiality
for  the  non-aligned nations.   We  would  not  go  so  far
as  to  pretend  that  any  man,  however  neutral  he  may
be,  will  never  err,  but  what  we  are  certain  of  is  that
an  executive board  could  act  only  if  the  three members
of  the  board  were  unanimous,  and  in  the  present  sit-
uation,  this  is  unthinkable;  hence,  the  action  of  such
a  board  could  only  result  in  mediocre  compromises."
—Prince  Sihanouk  (Cambodia)  at  the  UN  Sept.  29
this  zone. ... It  should not be forgotten  that  the two great
colonial  powers  of  the  last  century,  France  and  the   United
Kingdom,  at  times  resorted  to  the  creation  and  maintenance
of  such  buffer   States  between  their  foreign  posessions."
WHY  SMALLER  POWERS  ARE NEUTRAL:  "Certain  [Western]
newspapers  claim  that  neutrality  is  an  absurdity,  and  non-
alignment  a  form  of  cowardice.  .  .  .  The committed  nations
. . . should  show a greater  understanding.  . . . Perhaps  they
will  admit  that  their  chief  concerns  are  quite  remote-from
those  of  these  countries,  for  which  the  problems  of  under
development  is  the  paramount  one.    How  can  one  conceive
of  a  sincere  and  genuine  political  alignment  among  nations
whose   peoples   are   separated   by   living   standards   which
range   from   opulence  to   dire   poverty   and   even  endemic
starvation?    The  recent  events  in  Cuba, Japan,  South  Korea
and  Laos  confirm  this  attraction  towards  the  neutral  position
and  justify  a  refusal   to  take  part  in  the  dangerous  game
proposed  by  the  great   Powers.    This  attitude  adopted  by
more  than   a  third   of  mankind  is  not  absurd   or  cowardly
but  is  rather  simply  an  expression  of  the  instinct  of  self-
preservation  linked with  a  very  human yearning  for  liberty."
The  Kind  of  Undercover  Cloak-and-Dagger  "Aid"  the  Uncommitted Nations  Fear
"Certain  newspapers  in  the  free  world  have  contended
that  the  neutral  or  neutralist  countries  are  taking  advan-
tage  of  the  rivalry  of   the  two  camps,  playing  one  camp
against  the  other  with  diabolical  skill  and  deriving  tremen-
dous  material  and  moral  profits  therefrom.  .  .  .  The  well-
known  magazine,  Time,  which  is  greatly  interested  in  our
country,  wrote  the  following—though  its   humor  was  cer-
tainly   in  rather  poor  taste:  'Sihanouk   unveiled   a  second
rule  of  aidmanship:  always  bite  the  hand  that  feeds  you.'
We  are accustomed to  this  kind  of  friendly treatment. ...
"Many  may  not  be  well  aware  of  something  which  the
small   nations   receiving  assistance   know   only   too  well:
that-frequently  friendly  assistance  carried  out  under   official
agreements  is  followed by  clandestine and  far  less  friendly
assistance.   This  last   form   of   assistance,  which  is  never
mentioned   and   which   gives  rise   to   indignant   hues   and
cries  whenever  it  is  mentioned,  can arise in  various  guises—r
either  as  subversion  or  as  the  supporting  and buttressing
or  completely   artificial   creation   of   conflicting   groups  or
as  the  purchase  of  stooges  believed  to  be  strong  enough
to  bring  about  the  secession  of  certain  provinces.
"If  the  conferring  of  such  official   assistance  must  bring
with   it   obligations   contrary   to   our   convictions,   to   our '
real  interests  and  to  our  honor  .  .  .  then  we  prefer  to
be  the  wolf  in  Aesop's  fable  rather  than  the  dog.   We  do
not  bite-the  hand  that  feeds  our  people,  we  bite  only  the
other  hand,  the  hand  which  is  trying  to  slay  us."
—Prince  Sihanouk   (Cambodia)  at   the   UN,  Sept.   £9
1  4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  10,  I960
To  Stop  Foot-Dragging,   One  Must  Warn  the   Pentagon   as  Well  as  Moscow
Humphrey's  Own  Report  Rebuts  His  June  Nuclear  Test  Deadline
The  printed  preface  by  Senator  Humphrey  to  his  valuable
Disarmament  Subcommittee  report  on  the  nuclear  test  talks
does  not  suggest  that  the  U.S.  resume  testing  if  agreement  is
not  reached  by next  June.    This  appears  only  in  the  Senator's
press   release  accompanying  submission  of   the   report.     The
suggestion  brought  him  recognition  from  the  enemies  of  an
agreement—top  page  one  billing   in  the  New   York   Times
which  usually buries his  statements and  a  respectful  bow  from
Chairman  McCone  of  the  AEC  but  it  will  dismay the  friends
of  disarmament.
The  Logic  of  A  Deadline
If  the  evidence  showed  that  the  Russians  alone  were  guilty
of  foot-dragging  in  the  Geneva  talks,  there  would  be  logic
in  a  deadline  as  a  means  of  putting  pressure  on  them.    But
the  Senator's preface to  his  own  report  shows  otherwise.    The
Russians  have  indeed  often  moved  at  snail's  pace;  a  striking
example  is  the  key question  of  an  inspection  quota.   This was
proposed  by them  over  a  year  ago,  Senator  Humphrey  reports,
but  it  was not  only  12 months  later'that  they  finally  came for-
ward  with  a  figure—"totally  inadequate  and  unrealistic"—of
how  many  inspections  they  would  permit.    It  was  3  a  year.
On  the  other  hand, the  U.S.  according  to  Senator  Humphrey
has  been  "plagued"  by  "an   ambivalence   of  purpose."    At
times  "we  go  for  long  weeks  and  even  months without  mak-
ing  major  concrete  or  constructive  moves."    The  point  of  the
Senator's  praise  for  Ambassador Wadsworth  as  a  long-suffer-
ing  hero  of  the  talks  is  not  only  that  he  has  had  to  take
"constant  abuse  .  .  .  and  unreasonable  demands"   from  the
Soviet  side  but  has  also  had  "to  mark  time  for  long  periods
while the  U.S.  Government  back in Washington  has  attempted
to  make up  its  mind."
"Ambivalence  of  purpose"  is  a  tactful  way  to  say that  the
Pentagon  and  the  AEC  are  both   opposed   to  a  nuclear  test
agreement,  and  have  done  their  best  to  undercut  the  national
policy  declared  by the  President.   While Mr.  Eisenhower  pays
little  attention  to  the  complex  details  of  the  negotiations,  the
Pentagon  and  the  AEC are in  a  position  through  their  experts
to  slow  down  the  talks  from  within  and  through  their  spokes-
man  to  poison  public  opinion  against  an  agreement,  as  does
Mr.  McCone  by  his  constant  sly  "surmise"  that  the  Russians
"must  be"  testing  secretly  while  the  talks  go  on.
To  set a deadline  may put  pressure  on  the  Russians to  speed
up  an  agreement.    It  may  also  encourage  the  Pentagon  AEC
crowd  to  intensify  their  efforts,  knowing  that  if  they  can  find
new  stumbling  blocks and  hold  out  until  June,  victory will  be
theirs.   This  is  why  a  deadline  is  a  pitfall.
STATEMENT  REQUIRED  BY  THE  ACT  OP  AUGUST  24,  1912,  AS
AMENDED  BY  THE   ACTS  OF  MARCH  S,  1933,  AND  JULY  2,  1946
(Title  39,  United  States  Code,  Section  233)  SHOWING  THE  OWNER-
SHIP,  MANAGEMENT,  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  I.  F.  Stone's  Week-
ly   pnblishd  48  times  a  year  at  Washington,  D.  C.  for   1900.    1.  The
names  and  addresses  of  the  publisher,  editor,  managing  editor,  and
business  managers  are:   Publisher,   Editor,  and  Managing  Editor.  I.
F.  Stone,  5618  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.;  Business
Manager  Esther  M.  Stone,  5018  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.  Washington,
D.  C.    2.  The  owner  Is:  (If  owned  by  a  corporation,  Its  name  and
address  must  be  stated   and  also  immediately  thereunder  the  names
and  addresses   of  stockholders  owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more
of  total  amount  of  stock.    If  not  owned  by  a  corporation, the  names
and  addresses  of  the  individual  owners  must  be  given.   If  owned  by
•  partnership or  other  unincorporated firm, its  name  and address,  as
well  as  that  of  each  individual member, must  be  given.)    I.  F.  Stone,
6618  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    Esther  M.  Stone,
6618  Nebraska  Avenue,  N.  W.,  Washington, D.  C.    Celia  M.  Gllbirt,
Cambridge,  Mass.   Jeremy  J.  Stone,  Menlo  Park,  Calif.   Christopher
D.  Stone,  New  Haven,  Conn.   3.  The  known  bondholders,  mortgagees,
and  other  security   holders   owning  or  holding  1  percent  or  more  of
total   amount  of   bonds,   mortgages,    or   other   securities   are:    none.
4.  Paragraphs  2  and  3  Include,  In  cases  where  the  stockholder  or  se-
curity  holder  appears  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trustee  or
In  any  other  fiduciary  relation,  the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation
for   whom  such   trustee   Is   acting;   also   the   statements  in   the   two
paragraphs  show  the  affiant's  full  knowledge  and  belief  as  to  the  cir-
cumstances   and  conditions  under  which   stockholders   and   security
holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the  books  of  the  company  as  trus-
tees,  hold  stock   and  securities  in  a  capacity   other   than  that  of  a
bona  fide  owner.   5.  The  average  number  of  copies  of  each  issue  of
this  publication sold  or  distributed,  through  the  mails  or  otherwise,
to  paid  subscribers  during  the  12  months  preceding  the  date  shown
above  was:   (This  information  is  required  from  daily,  weekly,   semi-
weekly  and  triweekly  newspapers  only.)   12,062.   Signed,  I.  F.  Stone.
Sworn  to   and   subscribed   before   me  this   2nd   day   of   October  1900.
Alvin  Bernstein,  Notary  Public,  Washington,   D.  C.    (My  commission
expires  7-31-1962.)
You  Can Still  Start  A  Gift   Sub  With  Our  Issues  on  the  Congo  Crisis  Beginning  Sept.  19  But  Please    Specify
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street
City     .
..Zone....State..
10/10/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tes  Q    No  D
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.
liihed  every  ThL.__.
An   independei
IB  -'  -
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED