I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960oct24.pdf

============================================================

Our  Feeble Answer to  Castro,  P.  3
How  Nixon  and  Kennedy  Helped Enact  the  Thought  Control Law  Now  Before  the  Supreme  Court,  P.  2
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOI,.  VIII,  NO.  38
OCTOBER   2-4,   1!)GO        <*£3£»
101
     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Truth  About   Quemoy  and  Matsu
For  just  about  two  weeks, the  question  of  what  to  do  about
Quemoy  and  Matsu  seemed  to  have  developed  a  really  sharp
difference  between  Kennedy and  Nixon.    The  latter  was  for
holding  the  Chinese  islands  at  all  costs,  the  former  was  for
relinquishing   them   as   indefensible.     Then   both  retreated
to  the  comfortable  ambiguity of  the  official  Eisenhower  posi-
tion,  lapsing  into  silence on  the  Chinese offshore  islands.  This
retreat  is  a  measure  of  the  mediocrity which  marks  this  cam-
paign.  For  the  debate ended  where  it  should  have  begun,  with
the  official  position.
This   position   is   a   standing   invitation  to   trouble.     The
official   position  is  that  we  are  obligated   to  defend   Quemoy
and  Matsu  only  if  an  attack  upon   them  is  adjudged  by  the
President  to  be  the  prelude  to  an  attack  on  Formosa.   Though
this  is treated  as  too  sacrosanct  for  criticism in  a  political  cam-
paign,  it  originated  not   in  any  carefully  thought  out  policy
but  as  one  of  those  typical  Eisenhower   compromises  among
the  stronger  men  and  currents  around   him.
Dulles  Was  For  A  Firm  Guarantee
Secretary Dulles  was for  making the  guarantee  of  the islands
explicit.    One  of  his  favorite  themes  had  always  been  "that
wars  come  about  mainly  through   miscalculation  .  .  .  that  if
the  enemy  were  put  squarely  on  notice  what  his  action  would
lead  to,  he  would  think  twice  before  taking  the  risk."   (John
Foster  Dalles,  by  ]ohn   Robinson   Beal,   pps.   131-2).     The
Seal  biography  of  Dulles,  an  official  portrait  written  with  the
Secretary's  cooperation,  says  that  at  one  point  in  the  negotia-
tions  with  Chiang,  Dulles   had   "agreed   to  include  Quemoy
and  Matsu  by name"  in  the  mutual  defense  treaty being  nego-
tiated  at  the  time,  but  that  the  President  "struck  the  two  place
names  out  when  he  saw  the  minutes  of  the  talks.    He   felt
the  U.S.  needed  a  certain flexibility in  its  defensive plans."
The  fact  is that  Britain,  India  and  other  of  our  allies  in  the
prolonged   crisis   over   Quemoy   which   began   in   September,
1954,  were  strongly  opposed  to  being  drawn  into  a  war  over
an  offshore  island  indubitably  a  part  of  the  mainland,  bearing
about  the  same  relation  to  the  port  of  Amoy  as  Staten   Island
does to that  of  New  York.    Anthony  Eden,  fresh  from  having
made  peace  in  Indochina,  was  talking  of  extending  the  area
of  stabilization  northward.    His  proposal,  that  "Chiang  cede
Quemoy   and   Matsu   in   return   for   a   Communist   cease-fire
agreement  and  a  pledge  to  settle  the  Formosa  question   peace-
fully"  was fought  by Dulles  as  "appeasement"  (Beal,  p.  227).
The  President,   who  had  overruled   Dulles  on  two   occasions
in  1954,  vetoing  military  intervention  in  the  spring  over  In-
dochina  and  in  September  over   Quemoy,  was  then   in  favor
of  a  general  settlement.    But  as  Robert  J.  Donovan   reported
in  his  book,   "Eisenhower:   The   Inside  Story"  the   President
feared  (p.  305)  that  to  draw  a  line  around  Formosa  and  the
Pescadores,  excluding Quemoy  and  Matsu,  "would  have  out-
raged  the  Nationalists"   and   "Knowland   and   his  colleagues
in  the  Senate  would  have  had  little  enthusiasm  for  a  resolu-
tion  consigning  these  Nationalist-held  islands  to  the  Commu-
nists."     So  Eisenhower  adopted  the   compromise  of   leaving
the  question  of  Quemoy  and  Matsu  vague  and  discretionary.
This  was  then  advertised  as  a  clever  move  and  dressed  up  as
the  policy  of  "keeping  'em  guessing."
They  Can Keep Us  Guessing,  Too
The  trouble  with  "keeping  'em  guessing"  is  that  the  other
side  can  keep  us  guessing,  too.    The  ambiguous  position  of
Quemoy  and  Matsu   is  dangerous  because  Peking   may  think
we  are  only  bluffing.    It  is  a  point  at  which  Peking  can  play
a  war  of  nerves.    How  do  we  know  whether  an  attack   on
Quemoy  is  an  isolated  action  or  prelude  to  an  attack  on  For-
mosa?     How  does  the  President   read  Peking's  mind  when
and  if  an  attack  begins ?   What  if  Peking  made  a  public  state-
ment  assuring us  to  the  contrary?   Would  such  a  statement  be
believed?    Could  any  President  relinquish  the  islands  under
attack  without  national  humiliation  and  a  political  defeat  at
home?    How  do  we  avoid  war  with  China  if  an  attack  on
Quemoy  begins?
There  is  another  way  in  which  this  qualified  and  ambigu-
ous  guaranty  puts  our  neck  in  a  noose.     Chiang  wants  the
islands  held,  his  only  hope  is war  between  us  and  China.    He
has  stationed  a  major  part  of  his  forces  on  Quemoy  (while
we  winked   at   this   violation   of   the   mutual   defense  treaty
which  gave  us  a  veto  over  such  troop  movements).    By con-
centrating   so  much  of  his  army  on  this  indefensible   island
in  the  port  of  Amoy,  he  can  say  that  loss  of  Quemoy  would
mean  the  loss  of  so  many  of  his  soldiers  that  it  would  irre-
parably  weaken  the  defense  of  Formosa.     It  would   be  hard
to  resist  such  an  argument  once  the  firing  started.
In  this  perspective,  sensible  policy  would  seem  to  have  two
choices.    It  would  be  better  to  give  a  firm  guarantee  of  Que-
moy  and  Matsu  than  to  leave  a  question  mark  dangling   over
the  islands.    The  present  ambiguous   guarantee  will  not  save
us  from  being  dragged  into  a  major  war  with  China,  perhaps
a  world  war  with  Russia,  over  these  distant  islands.    On  the
other  hand,  to  relinquish   them   just  like  that  doesn't   make
sense  either.    The  best  policy  would  be  to  negotiate  a  general
settlement  with  China  in  which  the  offshore  islands   provided
a  bargaining  card.    But  that  means  to  negotiate  with  Peking
which   means  to  recognize  it  and   it  means  to  stop   treating
Chiang  as  if  we  were  his  vassal  instead  of  him  being  ours.
And  that  is  what  no  one  dares  say.    So  we  are  left  hanging
on  the  hook  of   Quemoy.
1   5  1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  October  24,  I960
Nixon  and  Kennedy  Joined  in  Passage  of  Thought  Control  Law  Now  Before  Court
Another  Fundamental  Issue  No  One Talks  About  in  This Phony  Campaign
If  there  were  a  major  third  party  devoted  to  civil  liberties
in  this  campaign,  it  would  be  calling  attention  to  the  part
played  by  Vice  President  Nixon  and  Senator  Kennedy  in  the
Internal  Security  Act  of   1950   the  constitutionality   of   which
has  just  been  argued  in  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court.    In  state-
ments  released  by  the  American Civil  Liberties Union  Oct.  5,
Nixon   deplored   the   "erosion"  of   First   Amendment   rights
and  Kennedy  called  for  "moral  leadership"  to  restore  funda-
mental  freedoms.    It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  major  third  candi-
date  to  ask where  they  stand  now  on  the  Internal  Security Act.
Kennedy  Voted  to  Override  Truman's  Vote
Nixon  helped  to  write  it;  in  its  original  form  it  was  the
Mundt-Nixon  bill.    Kennedy helped  to  make  it  law  by  voting
in  the  House  to  override  President  Truman's  veto  of  the  bill
as  one  which  would  "make  a  mockery of  the  Bill  of  Rights"
and  put  the  Government  "in  the  thought  control  business."
In   1950,  Nixon  and  Kennedy  agreed  in  favoring  restriction
of  basic  liberties.    In  I960,  they  assure  the  ACLU  they  are
all   for   the   Bill  of   Rights.    Opportunism  and   lack  of   real
conviction  is  evident  in  the  record  of  both  men.   The  records
of  both  show  that  characteristic cold  war  fervor  about crusad-
ing  for  liberty abroad  while remaining indifferent  to  its  evap-
oration  at  home.    Or  is  the  liberty  they  defend  abroad  only
freedom  of  exploitation?
The  Internal   Security  Act  of   1950  is  a  sleeping  monster.
If  upheld  by  the  Supreme  Court,  it  would  make  available  in
any  future  period  of  hysteria  or  crisis  a  means  of   repression
far   beyond  those   of   Congressional  witch  hunt  committees.
The   Subversive  Activities  Control   Board  established  by  the
Act  would  have  the  power  to  determine  what  organizations
were  "Communist  action",   "Communist  fronts"   and   "Com-
munist  infiltrated",  and  to  impose  severe  restrictions  on  the
employment  and  travel  rights  of  members,  and   to  make  it
virtually  impossible  for  them  to  exercise  their  rights  of  speech
and  press.    The  organizations so  stigmatized would  be  deter-
mined  by  a  combination  of  political  espionage  and  proof  by
drawing  "parallels"   between  the  positions  they  espoused  and
those   of   the   Communists.    One   need   only   recall   Nixon's
attacks  on  Democratic party  rule  as  "twenty  years of  treason"
to  realize that  unscrupulous men,  a  new  McCarthy,  could  use
these  weapons  against  a  major  party  as well  as  against minor-
ity  radical  groups.    There  are  few  if  any  progressive  issues
which  the  Communists  have  not  also  supported  from  time  to
Surveillance  or  Entrapment?
The  Supreme  Court  has  just   granted  a  hearing   to
the   appeal   of   Bernhard   Deutch   from   a   House   Un-
American  Activities  Committee  contempt  citation.   The
case  raises  two  interesting  questions,  one  political,  the
other  legal.    The  legal  question  is  whether  any  valid
legislative   purpose  is   served   by   requiring   disclosure
of  names  from  a  witness  who  has  otherwise  answered
all  questions  about  his  own  past  activities  as  a  Com-
munist  and  those  of  his  group.    Deutch's   position,  in
refusing   only  to  name  others,   is  thus  much  like   that
of   Watkins.
The  other  question  is  the  propriety  of  having   FBI
agents   work  in  the  Communist  party  not  only  as  in-
formers  but  as  organizers  and  recruiters  of  those  upon
whom   they  spy.    This,   in  a  criminal  case,  would  be
attacked  as  entrapment.   Mr.  Deutch  as  a  young  man
was  a  member of  a  Communist  group  for  several  years
at  Cornell.    "The  entire  tragi-comic  operation  on   the
campus,"   his   petition   to   the   Court   points   out,   "was
conducted  under  the  auspices  of,  and apparently largely
through,  the  management of  an  employee of  the  FBI—
the   same   Ross   Richardson  who   conducted  petitioner
to  the  last  few  meetings  he  attended  (the  last   'meet-
ing'  was   with   Richardson  alone!),   collected  his   dues
to  the  Party  and  ultimately named  him  as  a  member."
time.   Once  a group  had  been  ordered to  register,  publications
adjudged  to  speak  for  it  would  be  required  to  carry  the  "yel-
low  badge"  of  a  notation  saying,  "This  is  a  Communist   pub-
lication.  .  .  ."    Worst  of  all,  persons  regarded  as  radicals
could  be  arrested  for  failure  to  register  under  the  Act  and
subjected   to   prolonged   litigation   to   prove   they  were   not
Communists  under  pain  of  $10,000  fine  or  five  years  in  jail
or  both.    Each  day  of  jailjire   to  register  is  made  a  separate
offense    by  this  Act.
The  first  test  case  involves  the  Communist  Party  which  has
been  ordered  to  register.    Its  registration  would  set  the  ma-
chinery  of   the   Act  in  motion.    The   main   obstacle  is   the
Fifth  Amendment.   Can the  government  constitutionally  force
people   to  register   themselves   as  Communist,  when  by  that
act  they  would  be  incriminating  themselves?    A  more  funda-
mental  issue  arises  under  the  First  Amendment.    Can  a  free
government  in  a  free  society lawfully  set  up  a  board  to  deter-
mine  what  thoughts  are  dangerous,  and  impose  severe  sanc-
tions  against  those  who  express  them?    We'll  have  more  to
say later  about  this  and  related  test  cases.   But  is there  no  way
to  inject  these  fundamental  questions  into  the  campaign?
Dodd's  One  Man  Inquisition  Another  Test  of  Nixon-Kennedy  on  Civil  Liberty
Another   civil   liberties   test   of   Nixon   and  Kennedy   is
the   question   put  to   them   in  an  open   letter  by  a   group
of   citizens  asking  whether  they  approve  of   the  one-man
witch  hunt  Senator  Dodd  has  been  conducting  through  the
Senate   Internal   Security  Committee  against   members   of
the  National  Committee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear   Policy.
The  open  letter  says  in  part,  "American  citizens  in  con-
siderable   numbers,  accused  of  no  crime  or  wrongdoing  of
any   kind,   are   now  being   summoned  to   Washington   and
questioned   in   closed   session   about   their   acts,    utterances
and  opinions.    This  process   has  been  going  on  for   several
weeks;  we  understand  that  it  still  continues.    The  targets
of  this  activity  are  leading  workers  in  a  nationwide  move-
ment   for   the   ending   of   nuclear   test   explosions   and   for
international    inspected   disarmament.     Their   inquisitor   is
a   U.   S.   Senator—Thomas   E.   Dodd,  Democrat,   of   Conn.,
who  has  announced  himself  in  favor  of  more  nuclear  test
explosions   and  an  increased   arms   race.  .  .  .  Do  you  ap-
prove  or  disapprove  of   the   activities   of   Senator   Dodd?"
•Among  the  signers   are  Rev.  Henry  Hitt  Crane  of  Detroit,
Rev.  Gardner  M.  Day  of  Cambridge,  Rabbi  Roland  Gittel-
sohn   of   Boston,   Russell  Johnson   of   the   Friends    Service
Committee,  and  Prof.  H.  H.  Wilson  of   Princeton.
We  suggest   that  the  best   way  to  test   where  the  can-
didates  really  stand  on  civil  liberties   is  to  write  and  ask
them  whether  they   approve  Dodd's  nuclear  witch-hunt.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  24,  1960
Castro's  Speech  to  UN  Too  Impressive  to  Be  Hooted  Down  Except  in  This  Country
State  Dept.  Reply  Disingenuous,
Fidel  Castro's  speech  to  the  UN   General   Assembly   Sept.
26  was treated  by the  American  press  as  if  he  were  some  kind
of   stupid  hysteric,  but   foreign  newspapermen   reacted   quite
differently.    The  London  Observer's  special  correspondent  at
the  UN,  Cyril  Dunn,  said  of  it   (Oct.   2),   "American  judg-
ment  has  been  unfair  to  Fidel.    His  enormous  speech  has
been  treated  only  with  derision;  someone  has  said  it   covered
everything  except  'the  row  between  the  British  and   Iceland
over  the  sardine  harvest.'    In   fact  it  was,  though   long,   an
impressively  coherent  version  of  Cuba's  sad  history,  as  seen  by
a  revolutionary Socialist  as  old-fashioned as  Keir  Hardie." *
I  did  not  hear  the  speech  and  had  no  chance  to  read  it  until
several  days  later,  but  I  found  those  Latin  Americans  with
whom  I  spoke  about  it  at  the  UN  very  impressed  with  it.
It  was  a  tour  de  force,  with  some  exaggerations  perhaps  but
none  as  great  as  those  U.S.  spokesmen  apply  to  Castro.    Ap-
parently  the  State  Department  decided  that  it  could  not  be
hooted  down,  and  on  October  13  it  filed  a  10,000  word  reply.
No  More  Monopolies  in  the   USA!
The  reply  may impress North  Americans with  little  knowl-
edge  of  Cuban  history  but  to  the  Latins  it  will  appear  dis-
ingenuous,  evasive  and  a  little  ludicrous.     It  is  late  in  the
day,  for  example,  to  pretend,  as  the  State  Dept.  reply  does,
that  the  Platt  amendment was a  form  of  benevolent  aid  to  the
new  Cuban  republic;  that  the  Guantanamo  base  lease  (at  the
bargain  basement  rental  of  $2,000  a  year)  was  the  result  of
free  negotiation;  or  that  the  U.S.  was  unaware  that  Batista
was  using  our  military aid  to  maintain his  savage  dictatorship
over  the  Cuban  people.    It  is  disingenuous  to  answer  Castro's
charge  that  the   ten-year  balance  of   payments  between   the
U.S.  and  Cuba was  $1  billion  in  our  favor,  with  figures  about
trade  balances  alone  which  were  only  a  quarter  billion  in  our
favor.    This  omits  such  major  items  as  remittances  on   U.S.
investments   in   Cuba   and   Cuban  payments  to   U.S.   owned
transport  facilities.    Castro  was  not  too  far  wrong  when  he
* No  U.S.   paper  I  saw  was  fair   enough  to  note  that  Dr.
Castro  did  not  support   Khrushchev's  proposals  on  the  secre-
tariate,  and  that  Cuba's  representative  at  the  special  emer-
gency  session  voted  with  the  other neutrals  Sept.  19 to  uphold
the   Secretary   General's   authority   in  the   Congo.
Evasive  and  A  Little  Ludicrous
Mercenary   Adventurer
Boston,   Oct.   13   (UPI)—The   ex-wife   of   Anthony
Zarba  who  was  executed  today  in  Cuba  said  today  he
plotted  to  overthrow  the  Cuban  government  and  "make
a  lot  of  money."  .  .  .  "He's   been  talking  about  it  for
about   two   years,   saying   that   if   he   succeeds   in   all
this,  he'd  make  a  lot  of  money."
—Sara  Francisco  News-Call  Bulletin,  Oct.  IS.
complained  that  by  this  billion  dollars  in  our  favor  "a  poor
and   under-developed   country   in   the   Caribbean   area,   with
600,000   unemployed,  was  contributing  greatly  to   the   eco-
nomic  development  of  the  most  highly  industrialized  country
• in  the  world."    The  funniest  item  in  the  reply  was  the  State
Dept.'s  insistence that  Castro was wrong  in  talking  about  U.S.
monopolies.    "As  for  monopolies,"  the  reply  said,  "U.S.   in-
dustries  are  forbidden  by  law  from  engaging  in   monopolistic
practices—by  the  Sherman  Anti-Trust  Act  of   1890   and   the
Clayton  Anti-Trust  Act  of   1913,   both  of  which  are  actively
enforced  by the  U.S.  government.    The  Marxist  idea  of  'mon-
opolies'   applied  to  the  U.S.  is  a  hundred  years  out  of  date."
This   disappearance  of   monopolies  may  explain   the   reply's
failure  even  to  mention  Cuba's  little  dispute  with  those  little
business  men  from  Standard  Oil  and  Texaco.
Unfortunately  our  dispute with  Cuba  is  not  a  peaceful  de-
bate before an  impartial hemispheric jury.   Castro complained
to  the  UN  that  Kennedy  in  a  recent  speech  said  that   "The
forces  that  are  struggling  for  freedom  in  exile  and  in   the
mountains  of   Cuba  must  be  supplied   and   assisted."     This
seems  to  be  the  Administration's  policy.    Anti-Castro  groups
are  carrying  on   recruiting  and   money-raising  campaigns  in
violation  of  the  neutrality act without  interference; Americans
are  landing  with  insurgent   forces.    In  our  free  society  with
its  presumably responsible  government, no  one knows  whether
CIA  with  the  secret  funds   at  its  disposal  is  taking  a  hand
in  these  armed  attempts  to  stir  civil  war  in  Cuba.    These  ex-
peditions  plus  our  new  trade  restrictions  represent  forms  of
aggression  fostered  by  our  government.    A  few  years  ago  we
criticized  the  Russians  for  smashing Hungarian  attempts  to  be
free  of  their  neighboring  Big  Brother.   We  seem  to  be  mov-
ing  in  the  same  direction  against  Cuba.
State  Dept.  Claims  We  Didn't  Know What  Batista  Was  Doing  With  U.  S. Arms
"Any  use  made  by  the  Batista   government   of  this  [U.  S.
aid]   equipment,   or   of   military   training   provided   by   the
U.  S.,  in  order  to  combat   Cuban  revolutionaries,  was  done
without   the  consent   of   the   U.   S.  authorities   and  in   dis-
regard   of   the   agreement.   .  .   .   When   it   became    evident
that   Cuba   was   undergoing   a   revolution   which   had   the
support  of  a  large  part  of  the  Cuban  population,  the  U.  S.
showed   its   determination   to  stay   out   of   Cuba's    internal
conflict   by   suspending    all   sales   and   shipments    of   arms
to  the  Batista   government.     This  suspension   was   publicly
announced  in   March   1958,   ten   months  before  the   Castro
forces   took   power."
—U.  S.    official     reply    to  Castro  at   UN,   Oct.   IS
"For   five   years,  five  months   and  four  days   [under   the
Batista  dictatorship]  the  six  million  people  of   Cuba  were
to  know  the  whiplash  of  cruel  oppression.   About  nineteen
thousand   of  them  were  murdered.    Tens  of  thousands  fled
into  exile.    The  tortures   and  mutilations   were  almost  be-
yond  belief.  .  .  .  Two men  should  have  known  the  sickening
story  in   Cuba.    They   were   Arthur   Gardner   and  his    suc-
cessor,  Earl  E.  T.  Smith,  U.  S.  Ambassadors   to  Cuba  .  .  .
frequent  guests  of  Dictator  Batista.  .  .  .  for  the  four  and
a  half  years  of  terrorism  in  Cuba  the  U.  S.  sold  warplanes,
bombs,   guns  and  ammunition  to  Batista ...  in  the  name
of  'hemispheric  defense.' ...  It  was  March  14,  1958,  less
than  ten  months  before   the  end  of  the  25-month   war   [by
Castro    against    Batista],    before    Washington      developed
enough  hindsight  to  embargo  all  arms  shipments  to  Cuba,
and  by  that   time  Batista  had  practically   all  the  weapons
he  needed.    The  embargo   was  a  real  hardship  only  on  the
Rebels,  seeking  desperately   for  the  tools  to  fight  and  pay-
ing  enormous   prices  for  them."
—Castro,  Cuba  and  Justice,  by  Ray   Brennan    (Double-
day,  1959),  then  Chicago  Sun-Times  correspondent  in  Cuba.
1   5  ",
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  October  24, 1960
One  Brokerage  House  Already  Forecasting   Move  from  Welfare to  Garrison  State
The  Future  of  A  Free  Society  Depends  on  Ending  the  Arms  Race
A  reader  calls  our  attention  to  an  advertisement placed  in
the  New   York   Times  Oct.  2  by  the  brokerage firm of  Arthur
Wiesenberger   advising   investors   to   prepare   themselves  for
the   "many  great  and  far-reaching  changes"  which  will  take
place  in  our  society  "as  we  shed  the  Welfare  State  and  gird
for  the  Garrison  State."    This  ad  accurately  charts  the  future
course  of  events  if  no  progress  is made on  disarmament.    The
corollary  is  that  the  arms  race  if  it  continues  must undermine
freedom,   not   only   of   the   mind   but   of   enterprise,  since   a
stepped   up  arms  race  could  be  borne  only  by  a  militaristic
state  capitalism,  subordinating  private  producers  to  planned
arms production.
Our  Scientist  Warriors
Unfortunately   a  propaganda  campaign  in  which  scientists
are  participating  is  trying  to  make  people   believe   that   by
stepped   up  arms  expenditures  "invulnerable  deterrents"  can
be  achieved,  and  that  civilian  shelters  can  make  it  possible  to
fight  a  nuclear  war  successfully  if  one  breaks  out.    A  useful
study,   which   throws   considerable   light  on   the  future   thus
outlined,  has  just  been  released  by the  Fund  for  the  Republic's
Center  for  the  Study of  Democratic  Institutions  at  Santa  Bar-
bara,  Cal.—Community  of  Fear,  by  Prof.  Harrison  Brown  of
Caltech  and  James  Real,  with  a  foreword  by  Reinhold   Nie-
buhr.    It  makes  useful  reading  as background  for  the  renewed
disarmament  discussions  at  the  UN.
The  authors  say,  "Once  the  shelter  program   is  underway,
it  will  constitute  a  significant   retreat  from   the   idea  of   the
obsolescence  of  war"  and  forecast  a  time  in  which  factories,
homes  and  stores  will  be  built  in  caves  and  "eventually  most
human   life   will   be   underground,  confronted   by   arsenals
capable  of  destroying all  life  over  the  land  areas  of  the  earth."
An  extensive  shelter  program  would  become  another  facet  of
the  arms  race,  with  each  side  compelled   to  dig  deeper   and
spend  more  on  shelters  as  the  other  developed  greater  means
of  destruction.   Unfortunately it  is  more  respectable  to  join
Rockefeller   in   agitating  for   shelters   than   to   make   oneself
suspect   by  fighting  for   peace.
Two  Atom  Bombs  in  Every  Garage?
AMC  Commissioner   I,.   K.   O^ooii   made   a   speech   on
uranium   purchases  to  the   American   Mining  Congress
Oct.   13   which   had  several  points  of   interest.     He   de-
nied  the  Wesl  was  trying  to  prevent  the. Jjpvict   Union
from   obtaining   uranium   from   Katanga;   he   said   the
famous  Shinkolobwe  mine  has  been  exhausted  and  "no
other economically exploitable  deposits  have  turned up."
Mr.   Olson   indicated   that   substantial   civilian   uses
for   uranium   were  still   in  the   future,   that   AEC  pur-
chases   were   mostly   for   military   purposes,   and   that
there   was   little  likelihood  of   nuclear   disarmament   to
upset   this  market.    His  most  striking  revelation   was
that   uranium   purchases   during   the   next   six   years
would  be  almost  as  great  as  in  the  preceding  18  years.
Our   weapons   stockpiles   are   already   supposed   to   be
enormous.    Former  AEC  Commissioner  Murray  in  his
recent  book  on  nuclear  policy  criticized  "our  tendency
to   go  on  piling   up  multimegaton  weapons  willy-nilly
on  the  false  assumption  that  we  can  put  all  that   we
can  manufacture  to  good  use  if  war  comes."  We  know
the   mindless   momentum   of   nuclear   arms  production
must   reassure  the  uranium  industry,  but  what  is   the
ultimate  aim—two  atom  bombs  in  every  garage?
One  of  the  most  important  parts  of  this  new  study  is  its
discussion  of  the  growing  alliance  in  our  society  between   the
scientist-technician   and   the  military,  which   now  controls   so
much  in  the  way  of  scientific  jobs,  grants   and    laboratories.
"Although   these  men  are  not  generally  openly  political,"  the
study   says  of   them,   "they   are   in   every  sense  of   the   word
paramilitary—civilian  soldiers"   and  in  a  showdown   between
the  military  and  civilian  power  in  government   "could  be  re-
lied  upon  to  staunchly  back  the  handlers  of  the  weapons  they
have  so  devotedly  evolved."    The  authors  note  that  the  mili-
tary  lobby  is  now  the  most  powerful  in  Washington,  strong
enough   to  defeat  a  disarmament  treaty  it  did  not  like  and
"that   the  armed   services  exert   more  control   over    Congress
than  that  body  does  over  the  Defense  Department."    In  this
context,   we  ought   not  to  be  too  complacent   about   civilian
supremacy  or  our  past  immunity to  a  man-on-horseback.  This
is  another  of  the  dangers  if  the  arms  race  goes  on.
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Street   ............
City    ..............
Enter  gift,  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street    ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
3  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
....................... ..Zone............State............ ........
10/24/60
for  $2 (6  mas.)  or  $4  (1 jr.)  additional:
.........................Zone... ...... ...State............ ........
gift  announcement?        Yes O    No d
Washington   15,   D.  C.
For  Some  Real  Education  l/sc  the  Blank  Below  to  Send  the  Weekly   to  That  College  Boy  (or   Girl)
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
F.   Stone'B  Weekly.
Hshed
.   \V eekly      Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter   at   Washington,  D.   C.,  under  the  Act  ot  March  3,  18T9.   Post-dated  Mondays  but   Dnb-
every  Ihursday  except   the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  w.,  Washington  IB   D   C
in    Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   P.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther   M.  Stone     Subscription-
S5   In  the   U.   S  :  $6  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.     Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Afric*
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED