I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960feb08.pdf

============================================================

Voteless  Southern  Negroes  Speak   Up,  P.  2
Walter:  He  Likes  the  Christian  Crusade  But  Sees  Menace  in  Youth  Festivals,  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  5FEBRUARY  8,  1960
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
WiU  de  Gaulle  Strike  Hard   Now?
The  French  crisis  is  not  over.    It  has  hardly  begun.     The
trouble  with  the  right  granted  de  Gaulle  to  govern  by  decree
without  parliament  is  that  it  further  narrows  his  base,  makes
his  rule  even  more  personal.    Not   legal  power  but  the  will
to  use  it  has  been  missing.    That  stage-managed   little  revolt
of  Fascist windbags in  Algiers  only  reflected a widespread  con-
spiracy within his  own  regime and  the  officer  corps.    To  purge
it  he  must  purge  many  of  those  who  brought  him  to  power.
The  collapse  of  the  revolt  in  Algiers  when  he  replaced   the
paratroopers  with  conscript soldiers  showed  he  can  remake  the
Army.    The  united  strike  demonstration  by  Communist,  So-
cialist  and  Catholic trade unions demonstrated  that  he  can find
a  wider  base  than  that  peculiar  amalgam  of  rightist   malcon-
tents  who  used  him  to  overthrow  the  Fourth   Republic.     But
though  de  Gaulle  loves  France,  he  seems  to  distrust  its  people.
He  has  contempt  for  the  French  officer  corps,  and  its  inepti-
tude.   He  has  said it  was against Dreyfus  and  for  Petain.    But
he  seems  to  share  its  incapacity  for  democratic  politics.    He
shrinks  from  calling  into  being  that  popular  army  and  broad
front  which waits to  support  him  in  ending  the  Algerian  war.
It  is too  late  to  play  Louis  XIV.
Still  Fostering   Delusions
Those   American  commentators   who  praise   de  Gaulle  for
telling  his  people  the  truth  are  mistaken.    He   is  far   from
candid.    The  truth  is  that  the  Algerian  war  cannot  be  ended
without  negotiating  a  ceasefire  and  the  conditions  for  a  refer-
endum  with  the  Algerian  Nationalist   FLN.    The  longer  such
negotiations  are  delayed the  harder  it will  be  to  prevent  a  vote
for   independence.    De  Gaulle  is  still  fostering  the   delusion
that  somehow  Algeria  can  be  "pacified"   into  remaining  part
of  France.    The  price  he  paid  for  putting  down  the  revolt  in
Algiers  was  to  promise  no  political  talks  with  the  FLN,   and
to  allow  the  Army  sterner  measures  of  repression   (when  tor-
ture  and  mistreatment  are  already  a  scandal  and  have  dug  a
deep  gulf  between  French  and  Arab).   Last  September  he was
talking  of   a  referendum  not   longer   than   four   years   after
pacification  or  a cease-fire.   Now  he  speaks  of  working  out  "at
leisure when  peace  has  returned"  the  ways  and  means  "of  this
or  that French  solution."  This  is an  odd  variety of self-determi-
nation.    He  tells  the  Army that  "when  the  time  comes  to  un-
dertake  the  consultation,  you  will  have  to  guarantee  its  com-
plete  and  genuine  freedom."    This  cynical  wink  marks  a  step
backward.    The  FLN  will  never  lay  down  its  arms  without
guarantees  of  a  free  internationally  observed   election.
The  FLN  had  reformed  its'  Cabinet  and  gotten   rid  of  its
own  die-hards in preparation for  talks.* De  Gaulle had  opened
broad  vistas by promising  self-determination.   The  FLN  on  its
2  *
How  State  Dept.  Helps  U.S.  Understand France
As  its  contribution  to  clarifying  the   French   crisis,
the   State   Dept.'s   Foreign   Leadership   Program   pre-
sented  a  Mme. Suzanne  Labin as  a distinguished  French
journalist  to  a  press  conference  in  Washington  Feb.  2.
She  has  been  lecturing   around  the  country   under   the
Department's   auspices   and  she   offered   the   following
opinions  (1)   that  de  Gaulle  may  be  in  trouble   because
he  is  not  friendly  enough to  NATO,  (2)  that  his  invita-
tion  to  Khrushchov was  a  mistake,  (3)  that  she  is  wor-
ried  because  Mrs. Roosevelt  does  not  take  the  Commu-
nist  menace  seriously   enough,  and  (4)   that  1,000,000
Chinese  students  and professors  have  been  sent  to  labor
camps  in  Communist  China  where  news  of  widespread
revolts   is   being   suppressed   as   she  learned   in   Hong
Kong  and will show  in a  book  soon  to  be  published here.
Mme.   Labin  also  claimed  to  be  the  author  of  Article  4
of   the   new   French   Constitution   "which   outlaws   the
Communist  party."   M. Jean  Baube,  press  officer  of  the
French   Embassy,   said   he   had  never   heard   of   Mme.
Labin  nor  of  the  French  Communist  party  being  out-
lawed.    Her  State  Dept.  biography  says  that  she  has
written  "various  articles"  (publications  unspecified)  but
one  French Embassy  source  said  she  is  a  free  lance  who
writes  for  Occident  which is  the  French  version  of  the
bi-lingual   Western  World  "a  non-profit   magazine   de-
voted  to  NATO affairs" edited  by  Edgar  Ansel  Mowrer.
His   office  said  she  had  written  three  anti-Communist
articles  for  it,  one  entitled   "The  Opium  Traffic  Serves
the   Communist  Conspiracy."    Mme.  Labin   seems   to
specialize  in dope.
part  had  dropped  its  demand  that  independence  be  recognized
before  it  would  negotiate.    The  stage  was  set  for  talks  before
the  summit  meeting,  and  such  talks  would  have  strengthened
de Gaulle's  hand.   That time-table has  been  upset  by the  revolt
and   the  possibility  of   negotiation   narrowed   by  de  Gaulle's
new   cloudy   promises.     These   can   be   broken.     The   Army
chiefs  must  fear  that  the  promises  will  be  broken.    The  ques-
tion  is whether  de  Gaulle  will  move  swiftly  to  purge  the  con-
spirators  and  free  his hands  for  negotiation  or  whether  he  will
be  content  to  punish  a  few  small  fry  and  allow  the  conspira-
tors  to  close  ranks  for  a  new  try.    De  Gaulle  has  shown  them
more  clearly  than  before  that  he  is  not  their  man.    The  issue
now  is whether  they  will  be  allowed  to  prepare  a  Fascist  coup
or whether  de Gaulle will strike hard  against  them  while  there
is  time.    The  stake  is  not  Algeria.    It  is  France.
* For  brilliant  and  sober  reporting of  the  events  behind  the
revolt  see  Claude  Bourdet's  independent  left  weekly,  France-
Observateur,  especially  the  issues of  Jan,  14, 21 and 28  (10  rue
des  Pyramides,  Paris  ler).
1   j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  8, I960
Despite  Pressure  Campaign  by  Fulton  Lewis,  Bi-Racial  Group  Stands  Firm
Volunteer  Civil Rights  Commission  Hears  Negroes  From  Deep  South
Despite  a  Red  scare  campaign  by radio  commentator  Fulton
Lewis,  Jr.,  a  group  of  16 white  and  Negro  organizations  held
a  one-day hearing here  in  Washington  last  Sunday,  Jan.  31, at
which  ten  witnesses  were  heard  by  a  Volunteer   Civil  Rights
Commission.    Former  Governor   McKeldin  of  Maryland,  who
was  to  have  been  a  member  of  the  commission,  discovered  a
prior  engagement  a  few  days after  the  Fulton  Lewis  campaign
began,  and  Vermont  Ave.  Baptist  Church  cancelled   permission
to  hold  the  hearing  on  its  premises,   and  it  met  at  Asbury
Methodist  instead.    But "fiiese  were  Lewis's  only  victories.   His
main   target,   Bishop   G.   Bromley   Oxnam  of   the   Methodist
Church,  stood  firm  and  took  part  as a member  of  the  Commis-
sion.*   "I  see segregation," he  said,  with  impressive  simplicity,
"not  as an  economic  or a political  issue but  as a  religious  issue.
The   Bible  says,  "love  one  another.'    You  do  not  segregate
those  you love."
The  hearing  was  a  triumph  for  the  Southern   Conference
Educational  Fund,  its  president  Aubrey  Williams,   its  director
James  Dombrowski,  and  its  field  representative,  Carl  Braden.
They  brought   together,   among  others,   the  Montgomery  Im-
provement   Association,   the  Tuskegee   Civic   Association,   the
Alabama  Christian  Movement  for  Human  Rights,  the  Missis-
sippi  Regional  Council  of  Negro  Leadership   and  the  United
Christian  Movement  of  Louisiana.   These  are  what  might  be
called   front   line   organizations  of   the   darkest   South.     The
stars  were the  witnesses.  Their  own  words  below  are  eloquent.
—* The  other  members  were  Rt.  Rev.   Geo.  W. Baber,  Phila.,  presiding
Bishop  of  the  African   M.E.   Church;  Rev.  Wm.  Holmes  Borders.  At-
lanta,  pres.  of  the  National  Fraternal  Council  of  Churches;  Philip  A.
Caraponeschl,  of  the  Baltimore  Equal  Employment  Opportunity    Com-
mission;  Dr.  Roland  P.  Mackay,  Chicago,  editor,  'yearbook   of  Neu-
rology;  and  Bt.  Rev.  C. Ewbank  Tncker,  Louisville,  Presiding  Bishop
of  the  African  M.E.  Zlon  Church.
Negroes  Tell  of  Chicanery  and  Terror  Used  to  Prevent  Them  from  Voting
".  .  .  he  [the  registrar]   asked  me  to  write  in  long-hand
the  Second  Article  of  the  Constitution.   This  I  did.   Follow-
ing  this,  he  asked  me  to  read  aloud  the  first  part  of   the
(First)  Article of  the  Constitution.    This  I  did ...     I  was
asked  to  fill  a  questionnaire  of  about  four  pages.  .  .  . The
entire   procedure  took   me  about  one   hour   and   10   or   15
minutes.    Immediately after  this  I  went  out  and  found  the
person  who  was  to  vouch  for  me,  and  presented  him  to  the
Board  of  Registrars.    After  being  unable  to  hear  from  the
Board  during  the year  1957, I  returned  in October  1958.  . . .
I  was  advised  that  if  I  had not  heard  from  them  it  was  be-
cause  I  had  failed  in  the  examination."
—Dr. Daniel  W.  Wynn,  Prof.  Philosophy,  Tuskegee,  Ala.
Q.  They  disqualified  you  because  your application was  not
filled out correctly?
A.  That  is  so.
Q.  Yet  you  own  500  acres  of  land  and  have  taught  for  34
years?
A.  34  years.     Other  than  that  we  have  teachers   in  the
parish  that  cannot  even  go  to  the  Registrars   Office   with
their  Bachelor of  Science,  Bachelor of  Arts,  Masters Degrees
and  also  Ph. D.'s.
Q.  Did  they  tell  you  what  was  wrong  with  your  applica-
tion?
A.  They  did  not.
—Prof.  J. N.  Blankenship, Saline, Louisiana.
"I  have  lived  in  this  area  50  years.    I  have  tried  to  pay
my  poll  tax  and  register  three  times,  and  have  been  turned
down.    I  was  informed  by  the  Deputy  Sheriff  no  Negroes
could  pay  poll  taxes  in  Tallahatchie  County  [where  Emmett
Till  was  murdered—IFS].   Many  of  us  are afraid to register
because  of  fear  of  loss  of  job,  credit  and violence.  .  .  .
"I  taught  school  in  Tallahatchie  County.   I  taught  there
for  about  12  years.    One  night  I  was  stopped.    I  had  my
family  in  the  car  and I  was  intimidated for  exactly  one  hour
and  a  half.    About  maybe  a  year  after  that,  I  received  a
letter   from   the   County  Superintendent   that   my   services
would  not  be  required  for  the  coming  year."
—Grafton  R.  Gray,  Charleston,  Mist.
"We  are  given  an  educational  test  which  is  not  known  to
be  given  to  any  member of  the white race  in  our state.   This
test  is  really  not a test  but  it  is  more  of a  trial  for  Negroes
applying  for  registration.    The  first  step  in  this  trial  for
registration,  she   [the   registrar]  gives  yon  a  copy  of  the
Constitution  to  read  from  and  yon  begin  reading   until  she
says  stop,  and  you  ask  her  did  you  pass,  and  she  says  no.
You  mispronounced  a  word.   Everything  has  to  be  perfect
in  order to pass."   —Mrs.  Louise Lassiter, Seaboard, N.  C.
"We  have  not  had  a  single  Negro  registered  in Haywood
County,  Tenn.,  since  Reconstruction  Days.    When  we  regis-
tered  our  charter  [as  a  Negro  Civic  and  Welfare  League—
IFS]  in  the  courthouse,  a  white man took  his  stick  and beat
one  of  our  members  who  went  to  pick  up  the  charter  to  the
extent  that  he  had to  receive  stitches  on his  face.
"Other  members of  our organization were  made to  move—
those  who were  tenant  farmers.   Others were  fired outright.
I  lost  my  position  as  a  principal  in  the  elementary  school.
.  . .  We have  had all kinds of  threats.  .  .  .  Most  of  us  have
been fined for  some reason  or other.... We have been  denied
loans  from  banks  and  most  of  the  business  places  will  not
deal with our members anymore.
"Back  in  1940  one  of  the  citizens  was  lynched  because  he
wanted  to  vote.   The  FBI  investigated  this  and  they  inves-
tigated  the  investigation.   Nothing  was  done."
—Curry  P. Boyd,  Haywood  County,  Tennessee.
"The  FBI  came  out  there  while  I  was  picking  cotton  [to
investigate  his  complaint  that  he  had  not  been  allowed  to
vote  though  registered—IFS].   They  told  me  to  go  and tell
the  Sheriff  everything  I  know, that  that  was  the  thing  to do,
and  so  that  night  I  received  a  threatening   telephone   call.
From  that  day  to  this,  my wife  and family  and  myself  were
threatened.   This  FBI  man who  came  out  to  investigate,  he
was  a  native  of  Fayette   County.    He  knew  my  father  and
before  him  my  grandfather,  and  we  went  back  and  talked
with  our  legal   counsel   and  we  wrote  to   Hoover  here  in
Washington.   They  sent  another investigator  out.   I  was  on
the  hot  dog  stand.   That  is  where  I  was.
"Now,  the  teachers  in  the  county  are  scared  to  register.
They  are  even  scared  to  talk  to  me  on  the  street.    When
they  see  me coming, they run the  other  way  and many farm-
ers  are harmed today on  account  we  want  to  come to  be  first
class  citizens.    They  are  making  us  move  by  the  hundreds.
.  . .  When we  go  up to  register,  the  landlord would  walk up
and  down  to  see  if  any  of  his  tenants  were  in  line.    When
they  go  to  register,  the  Sheriff  gets  the  names  and calls  the
landlord,  and  the  landlord would make him  move that  night.
...  I  was threatened,  If  you keep  with  that  voting  issue,
you  will  come  up with  a  necktie  around  your  neck.'
"Q.  Have you ever voted?
"A.  I never  voted in my  life."
—John  McFerren,  Fayette  County,  Tenn.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  8,1960
He  Seems  Intent   on  Proving  That  We,  Too,  Have  An  Iron  Curtain   Mentality
Why  Walter  Is Worth  His  Weight  in  Ural  Gold  to  Red Propaganda
Suppose  the  U.S.  had  held  a  world  youth  festival  in  1957
and  the   Russians  had  done  their  best  to  discourage  any  of
their  young  people  from  attending.    A  delegation   had  gone
anyway.    On  its  return   the  leaders  were   summoned   to  the
Foreign   Office   in  Moscow  and   deprived   of   their  passports.
Then  they  were  subpoenaed  on  suspicion  of  pro-capitalism  to
appear  before  an  un-Russian Activities  Committee  headed  by
Tadeusz  Walterovich,  a  fine  old  Bolshevik  type  who'd   send
his  own  grandmother  to  the  Siberian  gold  mines  on  suspicion
of  keeping  an  icon  under  her  mattress.    Suppose  the  hearings
then  proceeded  to  glorify  those  Russians  who  went  to  the  fes-
tival  only  to  inform on  the  others,  and  you  get  a  pretty  good
picture  of  what  the  hearings  just  begun  in  Washington  look
like  to  the  outside  world.
What  is  happening   here  before   the   House  Un-American
Activities  Committee  is  worth  so  much  to  Communist   propa-
ganda  that  our  government  ought  to  take  that  new  $327,000
appropriation  for  the  Un-Americans  and  add  it  to   Moscow's
lend-lease  account.    At  a  press  conference  here  the  week  be-
fore  the  hearings  opened,  spokesmen   for  the  five  youth   fes-
Walter  Must  Appear  in  Court
Federal  Judge Edward Weinfeld Jan. 28 denied a gov-
ernment  motion  to  quash  a  subpoena  requiring  Chair-
man Walter  of  House Un-Americans to  appear as  & wit-
ness  in  the  forthcoming  trial  of  Pete  Seeger,   the  folk
singer,  for  contempt.   Seeger  pleaded the  First Amend-
ment  in  refusing  to  answer  questions  in  the  1957  inves-
tigation  of  the  entertainment business.    His  trial  begins
March  21.
tival  leaders  subpoenaed  said  the  first  thing  asked  at  the  Mos-
cow festival  in  1957  was whether  they weren't  afraid  of  losing
their  passports  and  being  hauled  before  the  un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee.    The  Committee  is  doing  its  best  to  make
Moscow's  worst  distortions  about  the  USA  come  true.
The  truth  about  the  youth  festivals  at  Moscow,  Warsaw  and
Vienna  will  never  filter  through  to  Walter  and  his  colleagues
who  are  the  American  equivalent   of  Russia's  old-line  Stalin-
ists.    The  truth   is  that  the  youth  festivals  were  important,
Iron  Curtain  lifting  affairs.    During  the  one  in  Moscow,   all
bars  were  down  and  Russians  could  invite  foreigners   to  their
homes  and  talk  with  them  in  a  way  that  is  still  rare  in  the
Soviet  Union.    The  result  was an  eye-opener.
If  They  Could  Only Subpoena  Ike
"Elsenhower's   invitation   to    Khrushchov   was    the
greatest  victory  for  any  enemy  of  America  since  Pearl
Harbor."
—Evangelist  Billy  J.  Hargis  addressing  the  annual
convention  of  the  rightist  "We,   The  People",  Chicago
Tribune,  Sept.  19,  1959  (see  box  below).
"Such  groups  as  the  American  Association   of   Uni-
versity  Professors,  some  justices  of  the  Supreme Court
and   highly   placed   policy   makers   of   the   Executive
branch  of  the  Government  do  not  and  will  not  under-
stand  the  threat  of  Communism."
—Chairman  Walter   of  House  Un-American,  to  Na-
tional  Society   of   New   England   Women,  N.Y.    Times
Jan.  26.
"Cultural   exchanges   between  Eastern   and  Western
countries  are  now  an important part  of  the Administra-
tion's  foreign  policy.    As  the  Un-American Committee
can  hardly  subpoena  President  Elsenhower,  or  stop  his
projected  trip  to  Moscow,  it  has  to  content  itself  with
subjecting  young  people  who  have  been  responsible  for
getting  groups  to  participate  in  cultural  exchanges  to
extreme  harassment  and  punishment."
—Joanne  Grant,  exec. Secretary  of  the  [7.S.  Festival
Committee  last  year,  one  of  those  subpoenaed   by  Wal-
ter, in  York,  Pa., Gazette and Daily, Jan.  %9.
For  not  a  few  party-liners  among  our  youth,  the  visit  was
a  sobering  revelation  quite  different  from  their  fairy  tale  pic-
ture  of  a  workers'  paradise.    For  many  Russians  skeptical  of
their own press,  contact with  our and  other  Western  youngsters
corrected  propaganda  stereotypes  about  our  own  country.
I  know  from  my  own  experience   that  young  people   (and
old)   in  both  Russia  and  Poland  are  hungry  for  escape  from
the  stuffy  atmosphere  of  party  line  conformism.    But  I   also
know  they  are  regretfully  skeptical  of  Americans  who  talk  to
them  of  freedom.    Walter  and  the  witch  hunters  are  worth
their  weight  in  Ural  gold  to  sophisticated    Soviet   apologists
who  say we're  as  insincere  in  our  talk  about  freedom  as  they
are.   Walter  proves  their  point.
Here,  when  the  hearings  opened  just  before  press  time  last
week,  was  a  secret  police  informer,  Herbert  Philbrick,  in  the
witness   stand   and   Un-American   Counsel   Ahrens  was   pom-
pously  putting  the first question,  "tell us  about  the  importance
to  Communism  of youth.  . .  ."
Walter  Puts  "Christian  Crusade"  Material  Into  the  Congressional  Record
The  tendency  of  the  House  Un-American Activities  Com-
mittee  to  turn  a  blind  and  brotherly  eye   on  the   lunatic
fringe  of  the  right  is  an  old  story.   It  is  new,  however,  to
have  Chairman  Walter  put  rightist  literature  into  the  Con-
gressional  Record.   He  seems  to  have  been  enthralled  by  a
discourse,   "The  Reds  Are  After   Our  Panama   Canal",   by
Billy   James   Hargis,   president   of   something   called   The
Christian  Crusade.    Walter  not  only  put  this  gem  into  the
appendix  of  the  Congressional  Record  Jan.  12  but  included
it  again  in  remarks  from  the  floor  a  week  later,  Jan.  19,
claiming   that   the   Government  Printing   Office   had   made
samp  error  in  the  earlier  version.    The  speech  warns  "Mos-
cow  has  had its  evil  eye  upon  the  Panama  Canal  for  a  long
time,  as  the  activities  of  Alger  Hiss  showed."    Somebody
must  have  caught  Hiss   digging.
Hargis is  a Tulsa,  Oklahoma,  evangelist.   Last  September
in  Chicago he  was  elected  president  of .a  right  wing  group-
ing  called  "We,  The  People" which  brings  under  one  roof  a
variety  of  reactionary  and crypto-Fascist  addlepates  includ-
ing  the  venerable  Elizabeth  Dilling  whose  book,  The  Red
Network,  alerted  the  country  in  the  30's  to  the  menace  of
the  New  Deal.   Hargis  unlike  one wing  of  this  movement is.
not  considered  anti-Semitic.   He  seems,  from  the  speech  he
made  to  the  convention,  a  middle-of-the-roader.    "Look  I'm
no  Jew,"  he  told  his  followers  cutely,  "I'm  jnst  a  plain  old
gentile  but  I  say  we  should  expose  the  Bosenbergs  not  be-
cause  they're  Jews  but  because  they're  Communists."   Ob-
viously  Hargis  like  Walter  ia a  liberal
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  8,1960
President's  Friendly  Words  Undercut  by  Too  Much  Red  Menace  Talk  from  CIA
How  Eastland  and  Dodd  Help  Anti-American  Propaganda  in  Castro's  Cuba
Except  for  its  reference  to  "the  intrigues   of   international
communism"  the  formal  statement  issued  by the  President  last
week  and  even  more  his  simple  words  of  friendship  for  the
Cuban  people  at  press  conference  deserve  commendation.    We
are  glad  to  see  signs  that   Castro  and  the  Cuban  press   have
taken   the  cue  and  piped   down   on  a  rather   hysterical   anti-
Americanism.     If   our   government   agencies   will   reciprocate
by  ending  statements   which   imply  that  the  Castro   revolution
is  a  Communist  plot,  the  way  may  be  paved  toward  friendly
and  helpful  relations.     Cuba  must  not  be  allowed  to   become
our  Latin  American   Hungary.
At  this  delicate  juncture,  Senator  Eastland  is  (like  Walter)
a  gift  to  Communist   propaganda.    He  symbolizes  exactly  the
kind   of   landlord   rule   and   contempt    for   colored    peoples
against   which   Latin   America   has  long   been   in  revolt;  his
friendship   for  Trujillo   is  notorious.     Dodd  of   Connecticut,
vice  chairman  of  Internal  Security,  is  becoming  as  bad  as East-
land.    This  new  Democratic  Senator,  an  ex  FBI  man,  overrode
State  Dept.  protests  last  year  to  allow  Pedro  Diaz  Lanz  to  use
the  committee  as a propaganda  sounding  board  against  Castro.
The  least  the  Administration  can  do  is  to  forbid  CIA   officials
like  Gen. C.  P.  Cabell   from   testifying  before  it.    His  own
rightist  preconceptions  meshed  too  easily with  the  Committee's
though   more   sophisticated.     Lost   to   attention   in   the   scare
stories  and  headlines  precipitated   by  the  release  of  the  Cabell
testimony  to  the  Eastland  committee Jan. 31 was  his  statement
that  "the assigned  task  of  the  Cuban  Communist  Party"  is  to
prevent  Castro  "from   establishing  friendly  relations  with  the
United  States."    In  this Eastland and  Dodd  help  the  Reds.
MORSE    SAYS   WHAT   THE   OTHER     DEMOCRATS
DIDN'T:  In  a  speech  at  Salem,  Oregon,  Jan. 29,  before  the
Democratic  State  Platform  Committee,  Senator  Morse  became
the  first  Demorcratic  candidate to  bring  up  the  Eden memoirs
and  to  warn  that  they  showed  how  unreliable  were  the  peace
claims  of  Eisenhower and  Nixon.
CLARK  ADVOCATES  NEGOTIATION WITH  CHINA:
CUrk  (D.  Pa.) became the  first  Senator  clearly  to  ask  negotia-
tion  with  Communist  China.    In  a  speech  before  the  ADA  in
Pliila.  Jan. 30,  Clark  said  Washington   and  Peking   each  has
things  it  wants from  the  other,  "When  two  nations  both  want
Words  Too Sane to  Make  Headlines
"One  of   the  complaints  frequently   heard  about   the
United   States   in   Venezuela  and   elsewhere   in  Latin
America   is  that   it   views  liberal  reform  governments
askance  and  does  not  care  about  social   progress."
—Report   on  Latin  America  by  Senator  Aiken   (R.
Vt.)   to  Senate  Foreign  Relations,  Feb. 2.
"Rightly  or  wrongly,  U.S.  enterprises   and  U.S.  for-
eign  policy are  frequently accused  of  partiality to  Latin
American  dictators.  . .  .  The task  of  bridging  the  abyss
of   mutual  suspicion   falls   on  U.S.  government   policy.
Radical   reform   movements   appear   to   be   inexorable
forces  in  Latin  America,  which  cannot  be  exorcised  by
ostracism,  and  are  probably  the  major  political  instru-
ment   by  which  various  indigenous   obstacles   to  Latin
American    economic    development    may     be    broken
through.  U.S. policy  should seek  more consistently  than
heretofore  for  points  of  concordance,  despite  the  explo-
sive  rhetoric of  Latin American radicalism."
—U. S.  Latin American Relations, Study  by  Univ. of
Chicago  Research Center, for  Senate  Foreign  Relations
subcommittee   on  American  Republics,  Jan.  22.
something  from  the  other,  a  basis  for  negotiation  exists.    We
have nothing  to  lose  by making  overtures  for  negotiation.  . .  ."
ADD  FEEBLE  SCRAWLS  ON  GREAT  MONUMENTS:
At  a dinner in honor  of  Father  Francis  E. Lucey  to  mark  his  50
years  as  a  Jesuit  and  30  years  as  regent  of  Georgetown   Law
School,  Chief  Judge  E. Barrett Prettyman  of  the  U.S. Court  of
Appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia  praised  Father  Lucey  for
being   the   first   to   call   the   philosophy   of   Oliver   Wendell
Holmes  materialistic  and  agnostic.   (Wash.  Star,  Jan. 29).
FOR  HISTORIANS  (IF  ANY)  AFTER  WORLD  WAR
III:  Don  Maclean,  Washington   Daily  Neivs   local   columnist
reported  (Jan. 21)   Dept.  of  Defense  had  issued  instruction
cards  to  its  employes  on  what  to  do  in  case  of  atomic  attack:
If  unable to  find  any  headquarters  or  military  installations left
at  which to  report,  "then  go  to  the  nearest  Post  Office,  fill  out
and  mail  a  Federal  Employes  Registration  Card."    The  card
does  not  say what  to  do  if  there  doesn't  seem  to  be  any  post-
office  anymore.
Include  A  Gift  Sub  With  Your  Renewal  to  Help  Us  Mnpt  Rising  Postal  Costs  Without  A  Price  Increase
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
I.  F.
Picas*
Cit-root
City
Enter
(To)
Qfroot
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
>  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub   for   the   enclosed   $5:*
. .............................. ......Zone........ ....State....................
2/8/60
gift  sub  for  $2  (6 mos.) or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
Name  ..................................... .........................................
..................,.....................Zone............State.....................
we  send  gift  announcement?'        Yes  D    No  D
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
IPS  Will  Introduce  Rustum  Bastuni,  Arab  editor  and  former   member   of  the  Israeli   Keneseth  to
speak  on Arab-Jewish  relations  for  Americans  for  Progressive Israel,  8  p.  m.
Feb.  16,  Community  Church,  40  E.  35th  St.,  New  York
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED