I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960dec19.pdf

============================================================

Kennedy's  Cabinet  Choices, P.  2
Grimmer   Sidelights   on   That   Glamorized  New   York  Times  Supplement,  "Citizen  Atom",  Page  4
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  46
DECEMBER  19,  1960
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
A  Nuclear  Warning  Disregarded  on  Pearl  Harbor  Day
I  have  never  seen  an  important  story  so quickly swept  under
the  rug  as  in  the  case  of  the  AP  dispatch  from  Omaha  Dec.  7
reporting  that  radar  reflections  from  the  moon  set  off  a  mis-
sile  attack  scare  at  Strategic  Air  Command   headquarters  on
Oct.   5.    The  date  of  the  disclosure,  the  anniversary  of  Pearl
Harbor,  was  a  fitting  one.    It  is  not  impossible  that  the  next
war  may be  set  off  by a  "surprise  attack"  accidentally  triggered
by  our   own   electronic  watchdogs.     The   story  appeared   on
the  front  pages  of  the  Washington  Star  (Dec.   7)  and  of  the
Washington   Post  (Dec.   8)   but  was  buried  on  page  71  of
the  Dec.  8  New  York  Times,  presumably  as  news  just  barely
fit  to  print.
The  Story  Broke   First  in  England
Actually  this  story  broke  a  week  earlier  in  England  where
it  gave  rise  to  questions  in  Parliament,  but  for  some  reason
no  news  of  it  was  cabled  back  to  the  U.S.    The  story  first
appeared  in  The  Guardian  (Manchester)   Nov.  28  in  Michael
Frayn's  "Miscellany"   column.*
"Do  you  know  the  world  nearly  ended  last  week?    The
early   warning   radio   station  at   Thule   picked   up  signals
which  were  analyzed by  the  computers  there  as  a  flight  of
missiles  coming up  over  the  horizon from  Russia  and head-
ing  in  the  direction  of  America.
"The  famous red  telephone  rang  at  Strategic  Air  Com-
mand  headquarters in  Nebraska.   All  over  the  world  SAC
crews  stood  to  their  planes.     Someone  in  Nebraska  sig-
nalled   Thule   for   confirmation.    There   was   no   answer.
Thule  must  have  been  hit  already.    What  restrained  Free-
World  from  launching  its  retaliation  weapons  during  the
next   half-hour   I  do  not   know,  unless   it   was   those  old-
fashioned  deterrents,  incredulity  and  funk.
"Whatever  it  was,  it  came  in  handy,  for  it  turned  out
that  Thule  had  picked  up  not  a  squadron  of  rockets,  but  a
large   earth  satellite  of   whose  existence   intelligence  had
apparently  failed  to  inform them, called  the  moon.   By  the
time  they  discovered  this  little  error,  however,  they  were
prevented  from  passing   the  correction  on  because  an  ice-
berg  had cut their  submarine cable  link. ... I  bet  they had
a  grand  old  laugh  about  it  afterwards.    I'd  utter  a  guffaw
or  two  myself  if  my  teeth  weren't  chattering  so  much."
Next  day  questions  were  raised  in  the  House  of  Gammons
by  three  Labor  members,  Mr.  Swingler,   Mrs.  Hart  and  Mr.
Emrys-Hughes.    According  to  The  Guardian  (Nov.   30),  Mr.
Swingler  and  Mrs.  Hart  asked  the  Prime  Minister  "about  a
report   that   U.S.   aircraft   operating   from  this   country   had
been  alerted  as  a  result  of  mistakes  in  the  radar  aerials  and
computers  at  the  radar  station,  Thule,   Greenland."
'The   story   was  not   reprinted,   however,   in  the   weekly
overseas  airmail  edition  of  The  Guardian,  but  appeared  in
the  Dec.  2  airmail  issue  of   London's  vigilant   Peace   News.
On  the  other  hand  the  AP  confirmation  from  Omaha did  not
appear  in  The  Times  of  London  either.    It  is  as  if  the  press
on  both  sides  were  in  league   to  shield  their  peoples   from
such  newa
Mr.  Swingler  wanted  to  know  if  Mr.  Macmillan  had  raised
with  the  American  President  "the  question  of  preventing  such
incidents   because   of   the   danger   of   accidental   war   arising
from  miscalculation   or  muddle."
."Amply  Sufficient  to  Prevent  Nuclear  War"
In  a  written  parliamentary  reply,  the  Prime  Minister   de-
clared,  "No  British  forces  and  no  U.S.  forces  in  this  country
were   alerted  on  the  occasion  to  which   the   Hon.    Members
refer.    I  am  satisfied  that  our  precautions  are  amply   sufficient
to  prevent   nuclear  war  starting   as  a  result   of   accident   on
the  part  of  the  West."
The   fact   that  the  reply  was  in  written   form  means  that
Mr.  Macmillan  had  advance  notice  of  the  questions,  and  time
to  frame  his  answer.    Under   British  parliamentary   practice,
a  written  reply  also  serves  to  cut  off  further  questions  on  the
subject  until  the  next  week's  meeting  of  the  House.
There  may  be  some  contradiction  between  the  Prime  Min-
ister's   reply  and  the  story  from  Omaha.    The  first  AP  dis-
patch   as  it  appeared   in   the   Washington   Star  Dec.  7,   said
"The   story  came  to  light  after   a  British  paper,   the   Man-
chester  Guardian,  reported  a  similar  incident  had  taken  place
last  week.    SAC  said,  however,  the  only  recent  incident  was
October   5."    The  Prime  Minister's  reply,   however,   seemed
to  imply  that  the  Guardian  story  was  correct.
The  AP's   wording   is  tantalizing:   "SAC   said ...  the
only  recent incident was October  5."    Have  there  been  others?
How  often  do  such  false  alarms  occur?
The   later   AP  story  as  it  appeared   next   day  on  page  71
of   the  New   York   Times   reported   the  Air   Force   said    "its
equipment   had   been  adjusted  to   avert   more  such   flurries."
A  spokesman  was  quoted  as  saying  that  Gen.  Laurence  Kuter,
the   SAC  commander   "had   found   immediately   that  the  re-
ported  detection  'was  totally  unsubstantiated  by other  informa-
tion   sources   and   in   no  way  indicated   a  threat'   of   missile
attack."
What  Other  Sources?
What  other  sources  are  used  when  this  expensive   early
warning   network   boggles?     Does   the   SAC  call   the   local
Omaha  paper  and  ask,  "Say,  have  you  fellows  heard   anything
of  a Russian  missile  attack?"    General  Kuter  according  to  the-
second  AP  version  "ordered  the  data  to  be  disregarded  and
he  telephoned  Thule.    He  was  told  the  apparatus  there  had
not  been  operating  properly."
All  this  is  treated  as  casually  by  our  press  as  if  it  concerned
a  minor   piece   of   plumbing,   though  a  slipup  of  this   kind
might   send  most  of  humanity  down   the  drain.    Isn't  there
some   member  of  Congress  alert  enough  to  demand  a   full
investigation   of  this  disturbing   affair?
1  8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   December  19, 1960
New  Secretary  of  State  Antagonized  Acheson  and  Became  China  Lobby  Hero  in    1951
Much  Good  to  Be  Said  of  Kennedy's  Cabinet  Choices  — Rusk  Only  Doubt
Given   the   realities   of   political   life,   the   Cabinet    being
appointed    by  President-elect   Kennedy   is  shaping   up   well.
Stewart  Udall  was  an   excellent   choice   for   Secretary  of   the
Interior.     Abraham   A.   Ribicoff   is  passable   as   Secretary  of
Health,   Education  and  Welfare.     Luther  Hodges  is  an  en-
lightened   Southerner,  not  a  bad  choice  for  Secretary  of  Com-
merce.
The   choice  of   Robert   S.  McNamara   of   the   Ford   Motor
Company   as  Secretary  of   Defense   seems  on   its  face   prefer-
able   to  someone   from   the   electronics  companies  which   are
now  the  prime  advocates  of  a  stepped   up  arms  race;  our  last
Defense   Secretary  from  the  auto  industry,  Charles  Wilson  of
General  Motors,  turned  out  to  be  a  friend  of  peace  and  no
respecter  of  brasshats.    At  least  for  the  auto  industry  today,
military  contracts  are  a  side  issue,   not  almost  everything  as
they   are  with   such   companies   as  General   Dynamics   whose
Frank  Pace  wanted  the  job,  or  with  the  aviation  crowd.
Topsy-Turvy  State  Dept.  Choices
The  State Department  choices  are  odd  in  being  topsy  turvy.
The  best  man  is  put  furthest  down  on  its  bureaucratic  totem
pole;  the  mediocre  one,  on  top;  the  second  best,  in  between.
By  any  sensible  standard  Dean   Rusk  would  seem  best   fitted
for   the  rather  routine  job  of  UN   representative,  and   Adlai
Stevenson   would   have  been  Secretary  of   State  with   Chester
Bowles  as  Under  Secretary.
It   remains  to   be  seen  whether   Mr.   Rusk   is  just   a  tech-
nician,   as  the   press  parrots  the   line   from   Kennedy   head-
quarters,  or  a  positive  force;  whether  Stevenson   and   Bowles
are  just  the  icing  on  the  cake,  or  whether  Mr.  Rusk  has  been
given   the   top   job   to   insulate   Bowles   and   Stevenson   from
right   wing   Congressional   pressures  and  to   enable   Kennedy
to  be   (as  they  say)   his  own  Secretary  of   State.
Mr.  Rusk   (as  may  be  seen  from  the  box  below)  was  not
quite  the  colorless   State  Dept.  character  he  is  cracked  up  to
be.    He  became  the  hero  of  the  China  lobby  and  the  Mac-
Arthurites   in   1951   as   Assistant   Secretary   for   Far   Eastern
Testimonials
"He's    a  man  of  a   million   ideas,"  one  former   State
Dept.  associate  cites  as   his  own  major   impression  of
Mr.  Rusk.    "He  throws  out  ideas  all  the  time.    They're
not  all  good,  but  a  lot  of  them  are.    When  we  faced  the
Berlin  blockade,  he  raised  the  question:  'Why  shouldn't
we   run   an   armored   car   through   and   see   what    hap-
pens'?"
—Man  of  A  Million  Ideas,  New   York   Times,  Dec.  13
"His   [Rusk's]  appointment  pleases  most  career  men
at   the  State  Department;  they   are  considerably  less
happy   about   the   prospect   of   welcoming   Mr.  Bowles.
The  Rusk  reputation  is  that   of  a  'solid  citizen'."
—Wall  St.  Journal,  Dee.  13
affairs  and  left  the  State  Department  after  his  relations  with
Secretary  Acheson  became  strained.    He  went  to  the  Rocke-
feller  Foundation  and  participated  in  the  preparation   of   the
Rockefeller  reports  which  advocated  a  stepped  up  arms   race
behind  a  smokescreen  of  diffuse  liberalism.    His   appointment
means   that   the   Rockefeller-Chase  Manhattan-Standard   Oil
family,  oriented toward a  strong  Germany  and  a  tough  colonial
policy,  will  have  a   friendly   ear  in  the   topmost   job  of   the
Cabinet.
We  applaud  the  tone  of  Kennedy's  statements  in  naming
Rusk  and  McNamara,   with  their   stress  on  peace.     We   wel-
come  the  assurance  that  Stevenson's  job  will  have  enhanced
prestige  and   give  him   entrance   to   Cabinet   discussions   on
former  policy.    We  are  glad   to  see  Bowles  as  Under   Secre-
tary.     And   we   welcome   the   appointment   of   G.    Mennen
Williams  as  Assistant  Secretary for  African  Affairs.     He  and
his  wife  have  a  warm  understanding   sympathy  that   should
make  him  and  our  country  friends  among   the  new  African
nations.
We   wish  Senator  Fulbright  had   been   named   Secretary  of
State  and  we  believe  both  Negro  and   Zionist   organizations
were  wrong  in  opposing  this  thoughtful   and  courageous  man.
The  Circumstances  Under  Which  Rusk  Last  Left   the  State  Department
"Assistant  Secretary  of  State  Dean  Rusk  said  in  a  New
York   speech  May   18  the   U.S.   regarded   the   Chinese   Red
regime  as   'not   Chinese',   could   assure   the   Chinese  people
of  'added  strength'  if  they  try  to  throw  off  Red  'tyranny.'
This  was  regarded  by  many  as  a  hint  the  U.S.   would  back
an  anti-Red   revolution  in  China  and  have  no  dealings  with
the  Chinese  Reds,  even  in  Korean  peace  talks.
"But   such   implications  were  denied  by  the   State  Dept.
May   21,   and  again   May  23  by   Secretary   of   State  Dean
Acheson  in  his  news  conference.     (Acheson  reportedly  re-
buked  Rusk  for  the  speech.)    He  told  newsmen  there  was
no  change  in  U.S.   policy  despite  claims  of   MacArthur  ad-
herents  the  Government  had  been  forced  to  adopt  the   Gen-
eral's  ideas."
—Facts   on  File,  1951,  Page   16SN.
"Resignation.    Asst.  State  Secy.  Dean  Rusk,  42,  Dec.   6.
Rusk  will  succeed  Chester  I.  Barnard  as  Rockefeller  Foun-
dation  president  when  the  latter  retires  June  30,  1952."
—Facts   on  File,  1951,   Page   S96K
"One   reporter  asked  [Acheson]  whether  Rusk's  statement
.  .  .  meant  that  the  U.S.   would  refuse  to  negotiate  a  settle-
ment  with  that  [Peking]  regime  in  Korea.   To  this  Acheson
replied  [direct  quotation  not  allowed  in  those  days  at  State
Dept.]  that,  well,  as  he  had  pointed  out,   if  you  are  going
to  stop  fighting  with  people  that  are  fighting  with  you,   you
would  have  to  deal  with  the  people  who  are  fighting  with
you. ...
"The   reporter  then  pressed  the  real  question,  'Mr.  Secre-
tary,  if  a  cease-fire  were  arranged,  would  we  be  willing  to
negotiate  with  the  Red  China  regime  a  permanent  settle-
ment?'   Acheson  replied  that  he  thought  he  had said  enough
on  the  subject,  and  did  not  intend  to  say  any  more.
"But   could  peace  be  achieved  in  the  Far  East  if  this,  the
crucial  question,  were  evaded?    The  inescapable  point  had
been   made   the   day  before  by  Walter   Lippmann  when   he
said  that  if  the  Rusk  speech  were  to  be  adopted  as  policy
'then  the  administration  has  worked  itself   into  a  fantastic
predicament.   It  has  made  the  issue  with  Red  China  not  the
repulse  of  its  aggression  in  Korea  but  that  of  its  survival.
Regimes  do  not  negotiate  about  their  survival.  .  .  .  These
issues   are   not  negotiable.    They   can   be  settled   only   by
total  victory'."
—/.  F.  Stone:  The  Hidden  History  of  the  Korean  War
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  December  19, 1960
Four  Justices  Prepared   to  Uphold  Statute  Aimed  at   Sympathizers    With   Integration
Supreme  Court  Barely  Musters  Five  Votes  Against  Ark.  Teacher  Purge Law
The  Arkansas  statute  held  unconstitutional  in  a  5-to-4  de-
cision  by  the  Supreme  Court  last  Monday   was  one  of   those
passed   by  the   State   Legislature's    second   emergency   session
in   1958   to  prevent  integration   in  Little   Rock.    Its   purpose
was  to  uncover  and  drive  out  of  the  school  system any  teachers
hostile   to   segregation.     It   required   all   teachers   to  file  an
annual  affidavit  listing  every  organization  to  which  they  had
belonged  or  regularly  contributed  in  the  preceding  five  years.
Arkansas  teachers  serve  on  a  year-to-year  basis  and  are   not
protected   by  civil  service.
The  Act  did  not  limit  itself  to  so-called   "subversive"  or-
ganizations.     Mr.   Justice   Stewart's   opinion   for   the   Court
leaves  one  to  infer  that  a  statute  so  written  might  have  been
upheld.     But  it  would   also  appear  from  footnote  7  of   the
opinion  that  a  statute  of  that  kind  would   not   have   served
the  purposes  for  which  it  was  intended.
A  White  Citizens  Council   Project
According  to  this  footnote,   a  witness  in  the   state   court
proceedings  who  was  a  member  of  the  Capital  Citizens  Coun-
cil   testified   that   his  group   intended   to  gain   access  to   the
affidavits  with  a  view  to  eliminating   teachers  who  supported
certain  organizations  the  white  citizens  council  did  not  like.
"Among  such  organizations,"  says  the  footnote,   "he   named
the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union,   the  Urban   League,   the
American    Association   of    University    Professors,    and    the
Women's    Emergency   Committee   to   Open    Our   Schools."
Even  in  the  overheated  atmosphere  of  the  South,  it  would  be
hard   to   stigmatize  such   organizations   as   subversive.      The
statute  had  to  be  broad.
The  main  target  of  the  act was  the  National  Association  for
the  Advancement  of  Colored   Peoples.     One  of  the   teachers
who  refused  to  sign  an  affidavit  was  a  Negro,  B.  T.   Shelton,
who  admitted   belonging   to  the  NAACP.    The   other   two
teachers  who  defied  the  law  were  white:  Max  Carr,  a  music
professor  at  the  University  of  Arkansas,  and  Ernest  T.   Gep-
hardt,  a  teacher  at  Central  High  School  in  Little  Rock.    The
evidence   showed   none   had   ever   been   connected   with  any
organization  remotely  to  be  described  as  subversive.
Un-Americanism  in  Louisiana
"Today  a  telegram  was  sent  by  the  president  of  the
Louisiana  Association  of  Citizens  Councils ...  to Tom
Jewell,  Speaker of  the  House  in  Baton  Rouge.    It  said
the  Association  had  'made  a  check  of  license  numbers
of   cars  hauling  children  into  Frantz   School   at   New
Orleans,'  and  listed  a  dozen  names,  addresses   and  li.
cense numbers.
"These were the  identities  of  white  parents  and mem-
bers  of  the  Save  Our  Schools   organization  who  have
been  defying  both  the  boycott  and  the   segregationist
hecklers   to  transport   children   to  the  besieged   school.
The  wire continued:
"We  urgently  request  that  you  refer  these  names  to
the  Committee on Un-American Activities of  the Louisi-
ana  legislature  for  investigation.  .  .  ."'
—New    York    Herald-Tribune,    from   New   Orleans,
Dec.  10.
The  Supreme  Court's  attitude  was  disappointing.     Almost
always,  where  Negro  rights  are  concerned,  the  Court  has  been
unanimous.    But  here  where  the  First  amendment   freedoms
of  both  white  and  Negro  teachers  were  involved,   the  Court
split.     Warren,   Black,   Douglas   and   Brennan,   the   liberals,
were  only  able  to  win  Stewart   to  their   side  by  acquiescing
in  a  very  narrow  ruling.
The  four  dissenters,  Harlan,  Frankfurter,  Clark  and  Whit-
taker,   showed   their   bias  in   favor   of   allowing   the   govern-
ment  to  restrict  First  amendment  rights  when  "overbalanced"
by   other   considerations.     The   main   dissent   relied   on   the
Mr.   Justice   Frankfurter   in   a   separate   dissent   began  by
describing   himself   as   "one   who   has   strong   views   against
crude  intrusions  by  the  state  into  the  atmosphere   of   creative
freedom   in  which   alone   the  spirit   and  mind   of   a   teacher
can  fruitfully   function"  and  ended   by  suggesting  that  may-
be   the   Arkansas   legislature   merely   wanted   to   make   sure
that  teachers  weren't  expending  too  much  time  on  outside  ac-
tivity!    He  did  add  that  "of  course"  if  it  were  used  to  purge
teachers   "solely   because   of   their   membership   in  unpopular
organizations,  that  use will  run  afoul  of  the  14th  amendment."
Documentary:  A  Cry  for  Help  From  A  Negro  Who  Tried  to  Vote  in  Mississippi
"On  Saturday, Nov.  19,  my  daughter,  Lynda  Faye  Kuy-
kendall,  was  beaten  severely  in  the  town of  Batesville,  Miss.,
by   a   Mr.  Leo  Daniels,   manager  of   the   Sterling  Variety
Store,  and  the  town  Marshal,  Mr. I.  C.  Seales.    Mr.  Daniels
accused  my  daughter,  Lynda  Faye,  of  stealing  some  candy
from  his  store.    Lynda  Faye  denied  stealing  the  candy and
told  me  she  bought  the  candy  from  the  Golden  Rule  store.
I  went  to   the  Golden  Rule  store   and  asked  whether   the
candy   in   question  had   been   purchased  from   the  Golden
Rule  store  and  was  informed  by  the  lady  there  that  she
had  sold  the  candy  in  question  to  Lynda  Faye.
"All  of  this  abuse  took  place  after  Lynda Faye  told  them
she  was   my  daughter.    My  trouble  began  with  the   local
officials  after  I  tried  to  register   to  vote.    I  was  not  per-
mitted  to  register   and  have  been  bothered   by  them   ever
since  in  one  way  or  another.   Mr.  Daniels  and  Mr.  Seales
slapped  and  hit  Lynda  Faye.     Mr.  Seales   hit  her  with  a
—Signed,  Willie  Kuykendall,  County  of  Coahoma,  Miss.,
with  the  Dept.  of  Justice  and  the  Civil  Rights  Commission.
blackjack.     Her  head  and  face  were  so  swollen   that   she
was  required to  remain  in  the  hospital  three  days.
"Lynda  Faye  is  just  12  years  old.  .  .  .
"Since  the  incident  I  have  been  harassed  no  end.   Tele-
phone  threats  against  me  and  my  family  are  commonplace.
Threats  to  burn  the  house  down  on  us  are  prevalent.   On
Sunday  night,  Nov.  27,  somebody  burned  a  cross  near  my
house,  the  remains  of  which  are  still  available.    My  name
is  Willie Kuykendall, Negro  male.   My  address  is  Route 2,
Box   8,   Batesville,   Miss.    My  telephone  number  is   7250.
Whatever  advice  or  assistance   you  can  give  to  me  will  be
appreciated.   If  I  can  get  assistance  I  plan  to  remain  here
on  my  own  home  and  land.    I  cannot,  however,  cope  with
the  lawless  element  of  the  white  group  alone.    I  feel  that
no  act  is  beneath   their  dignity  even  to  murdering   me.   I
will  be  here  as  long  as  I  can;  your  assistance  will  be  the
greatest  factor  in  determining  just  what  course  I  take."
sworn  before   R.  L.  Greed,  notary   public.     Affidavit    filed
Copy   sent  us  by  Southern  Conference   Educational   Fund.
1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  19, 1960
Two  Fallacies  in  the  Rules  Fight
Two  fallacies  are  being  propagated to  discourage  a
fight  on  the  rules  when  the  new  Senate  convenes.   The
first  is  that  it  would  indefinitely  postpone action  on  the
incoming  President's  program.    This  is  not  true.    We
are  informed  by  a  Senatorial  authority  that  the  fight
to, end  the  filibuster  rule  took  two  days  in  1959,  one
day  in  1957,  and  two  days  in 1953.
The  other  fallacy   is  that  it  would  be  wiser  to  put
off  the  matter of  rules reform  until  later in  the  session.
In  the  Senate  the  only  possible  chance  of  reforming the
rules  by  majority  vote  is  on  the  opening  day  of  a  new
session.    In  1957  and  again  in  1959  Nixon  as  presiding
officer   ruled  that   a  new   Senate   had  a   constitutional
right  to  change  its  rules  by  majority  vote  on  opening
day.     Once  other  business  is  taken  up,  the  old  rules
go  into  effect  automatically  and  changes  after  that  are
subject  to  filibuster  under  the  two-thirds rule.
True   Picture   Different   From   Glamorized  New   York  Times   Supplement   on  "Citizen  Atom"
Sober  Warnings  on  the  Radioactivity  in  Food,  Drugs  and  Waste
RADIATION-IS-GOOD-FOR-YOU:   That    special    New
York    Times    Sunday   supplement    (Dec.    11)    on   "Citizen
Atom"  by  General  Electric is  being  broadcast  by  nuclear  firms
to  soft  soap  public  opinion  on  radioactive  dangers  in  peace-
time  uses.    Nucleonics   (Dec.  8)   reported  that  AFL-CIO  pro-
tests had  forced  abandonment  of  plans  to  sell  reprints  without
the  GE  label  so  the  unwary would  not  realize  this  was adver-
tising  copy,  not  objective  reporting;  more  than  1,000,000  re-
prints  have  already  been  ordered.     Two  authoritative   recent
speeches  throw  a  different  light  on  the  problem.    George  P.
Larrick,  U.S.  Commissioner of  Food  and  Drugs  told  the  Food
Law  Institute  Conference   here  Nov.   28,  "We  do  not   have
facilities  to  safeguard  the  food   and  drug  supply   adequately
from  contamination  with  radioactivity.   We  do  not  even  have
facilities  to  determine  on  a  statistically  sound  basis  whether
the   amounts  of   radioactivity  now  occurring   in  food   consti-
tute  a near  range  or  a  long  range  threat  to  the  public  health."
On  Dec.  13  Dr.  Chauncey  D.  Leake,  dean  of  the  College of
Medicine at  Ohio  State and  a past  president  of  the  AAAS,  told
a   National    Conference   on   Water   Pollution   here   that   the
dumping of  radioactive wastes in  the  sea was  "the  most  serious
potential  danger   to  our   long   range   health   as  far   as  water
pollution   is  concerned."     Dr.   Leake  said  the   concrete   con-
tainers  used  for  radioactive  wastes  would  go  to  pieces  in  sea-
water  and  release  their contents.    "Out  of  sight,  out  of  mind,"
Dr.  Leake  said,  "is  not  a  very  satisfactory  way  to  handle  this
problem."
LATIN   AMERICA:   American   Broadcasting   and   Time,
Inc.,  deserve  applause  for  their  "Yankee,  No"   TV  film  and
its   sympathetic  exposition  of   Cuban   and   Latin   American
problems. ...  So  does  the  White  House  for  calling  off our
silly  Caribbean  patrol,  and  the  State  Dept.  for  finally  recog-
nizing  the  new  regime  in  El  Salvador.  .  .  .  There  is  hope  of
a  new  turn  in  Cuban  relations  and  softer  tone  in  both  Havana
and  Washington  may  reflect  the  beginning of  informal  feelers
for  a  settlement.  .  .  . Why  not  let  Canada mediate?
crisis  brewing  in  Laos.    This  tiny  country  on  the  borders  of
Communist  China  has  all  the  makings  of  a  new  Korea,  thanks
to  our  unwillingness  to  allow  a  neutralist  regime  in  accord-
ance  with  the  1954  Indochinese  settlement.    The  U.S.  prefers
a  split  Laos, with  the  Southern  half  in  SEATO.
BOUQUETS:  In  this,  our  last  issue  of   I960  and  of   the
Eisenhower  Administration, we  want  to  pay  tribute  to  Attor-
ney  General  Wm.  P.  Rogers,  Jr.,  for  bringing  a  fresh  integrity,
efficiency  and  respect  for  basic  rights  into  the  Justice  Depart-
ment  after  the  dreadful  years  of  Herbert   Brownell  and   the
Truman   cronies  who  preceded  him;  to  Secretary  of  Health,
Education  and.Welfare  Arthur  S.  Flemming  for  a  fine  record
in  the  public  service  and  for  his  position  in  the  Cabinet  con-
troversy  over  fallout  and  nuclear  testing;  and  to  Miss  Francis
G. Knight  for  the new  courtesy  and  efficiency  she  brought  into
the  Passport  Office,  and  for  her  courage  in  opposing  the  efforts
of  Congressman  Walter   to  maintain  political  bars  on  travel
despite  liberal  court  decisions.
MAN-OF-THE-YEAR  AWARD:   In  gratitude  and  admira-
tion  to  Dr.  Willard  Uphaus,  who  spent  the  year  I960  in  a
New  Hampshire  jail,  a  martyr  in  the  cause  of  civil  liberty.
LAOS:   It  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the  gravity  of  the
The   Weekly   Does  Not  Go  to  Press  the  Last  Two  Thursdays   in  December — Next   Issue   Dated   January   9
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name
Street    ..................
City   ......................
....................Zon«............State....................
12/19/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name     ..............................................................................
City   ........................................»Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone'1  Weekly.    Entered  as  Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington.  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  t.   1879.    Poet-dated  Monday*  bat  published  every  Than-
day  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington,  D.  C.   An  Independent  weekly
published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  In  the  D.  S.;  8  In
Canada;   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   SIB  to   Europe;    S20   to   Israel,   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED