I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jun20.pdf

============================================================

Harriman  on Mr.  K  and  the  U-2,  P.  2
How  the  AEC Gambles  With  the  Safety  of  Detroit;  the  Lagoona  Beach  Reactor  Case,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  24JUNE   20,   1960
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The New  Soviet Arms Plan and  the Fear of Surprise Attack
For   a  country  which  has  been   in  as  much  of   a  dither  as
ours  during  the  past  few  weeks  over  the  danger  of   surprise
attack,   it   is  astonishing  how   little  attention   has   been   paid
to  the  new  Soviet  disarmament proposals  which  deal  directly
with   the   problem.     In   part   this   inattention   is  due   to   Mr.
Khrushchov   himself;   his   lack   of    restraint   at   the   Kremlin
press  conference  blanketed the  plan  it  was  supposed  to  launch.
In  part,  however,   the   failure   of   the   American   press  to  dis-
cuss   these    Soviet   proposals   in   any    but    the   most  cursory
fashion    illustrates   the   extent   to   which   our   editors   and   re-
porters   rely  on   official   handouts.    The   propaganda  agencies
of   White   House,    State   Department   and   Pentagon   turned
on  the  "danger  of  surprise  attack"   chorus  to  cover  the  U-2
affair.    When   serious  proposals   are  made   to  deal  with  this
danger,   the   government's   spokesmen   suddenly   lose  interest
in   the   subject  and   our   own   press—almost   as   Pavlovian   in
its   mechanical   response   to   the   government   line   as   Soviet
journalists—follow   suit,   too.     They   only   salivate  when   the
official   bells   ring.
The  Key  to  the  Problem:  Means  of  Delivery
Two  years  ago  Philip   Noel-Baker   in  his  book   The   Arms
Race,   the   most   comprehensive   study  made   in   recent  years,
said   "the    problem   of   nuclear   aggression,   which   threatens
the   future   existence   of   mankind,   could    be   solved    if   the
'means  of  delivery'  required   for  nuclear  weapons   were  abol-
ished."     Now   the  Russians  have   put   forward   a  three-stage
disarmament  program   the  first  stage   of  which   calls   for   the
destruction   under    international    control    "of    all   means   of
delivering  nuclear weapons"  including  the  one  weapon  against
which   there   is  no   defense,   the  weapon   which   for   the  first
time  opens  our  country  to  direct  attack,  the  intercontinental
ballistic  missile.    The   Russians  offer   to  destroy  this  weapon
which   menaces   us   if   we   will   disband   the   overseas   bases
which     menace     them.     "International     inspection    teams"
would  supervise  the  elimination   of   all   foreign  bases,  estab-
lish  controls  "on   airfields   and   at  ports"  to   make  sure   they
are   not   used   for  military  purposes"  and—here  we   come   to
the  crucial  provision-—"at  the   same   time  the   destruction   of
missile-launching  sites  shall  be  carried   out  under   the   super-
vision   of   an   international    control   organization,   with    the
exception   of   the   sites   which   shall   be   maintained   for   the
launching  of   rockets   for   peaceful   purposes."
To  make  sure  that  these  rocket  sites  are  not  misused,  the
proposed   treaty  would   establish  two  safeguards.      Paragraph
4  of   the   First  Stage  says   "The    launching  of   rockets   shall
be  carried  out  solely  for  peaceful  purposes  and  in  accordance
with   predetermined   and   mutually  agreed   criteria,  and   shall
be  accompanied   by  agreed  measures  of  verification,  including
Add  Aberrations  of  A  Senator
Mr.   HUMPHREY.   Mr.  President,   I   ask   unanimous
consent  to  have  printed  as  a  Senate  document  a  study
by  Dr.  Herman  Kahn   [of  the  Air  Force  RAND  Corp.]
entitled  'The  Nature and  Feasibility  of  War  and  Deter-
rence'  along  with  a  short  foreword  I  have  prepared."
—Humphrey   in  U.S.  Senate, May  24.
"I  consider  it  an  honor to  present ...  it  embodies the
intellectual  honesty  and  rigor  so  much  needed  in  dis-
cussing  the  problems of  our  survival  as  a  free  people."
—Fi'um   Humphrey's    foreword,   Sen.   Doc.  101.
"We  must  be  able  to  stand  up  to  the  threat  of   fight-
in;,'  a  war  and  to  credibly  threaten  to  initiate  one.  [Em-
phasis  added].  .  .  .  We  must  have  an  'alternative   to
peace'.  .  .  .  These  remarks  will  distress  all  who,  very
properly,  view  the  thought  of   fighting   a  war  with  so
much   horror   that   they  feel  uneasy  at   having  even   a
high-quality  deterrent  force,  much  less  a  credible  capa-
bility  for  initiating,  fighting  and  terminating  all  kinds
of   wars.    [Emphasis   added.]    While  one   can  sympa-
thize  with  this  attitude,  it  is,  I  believe,  close  to  being
irresponsible."
—From  Herman  Kahn's   conclusions.
the  inspection   of  the  sites  for   the  launching   of   such   rockets."
[Italics  added].   Paragraph  7  spells  this  out.      "International
inspection   teams  dispatched   by  the   control   organization,"   it
says,  "shall   be  entitled  to  carry  out  comprehensive   examina-
tion  of   rocket  devices  being  launched   for   peaceful  purposes
and   Io  be  present   at  the  time  of  launching."   [Italics  added].
This  would   disclose  those   bases  the  U-2's  were  spying  out.
Before  Those  Space  Platforms Appear
These  safeguards  against   surprise  attack  would   also   offer
means   of   curbing   the   next   development—space   platforms
which   could   deepen   the  universal  nightmare  by  threatening
to   catapult   nuclear   rockets   from   the   skies.     If   the   danger
of   surprise  attack   is  so  great  that   it   justifies   U-2   flights,   it
certainly   justifies   a  great   national  debate   on   these   proposals
and  their  fullest  exploration   at  the  negotiating   table.    They
also   contain   provisions   forbidding   the   spread    of    nuclear
weapons   to  powers  not  already  possessing   them,  and   calling
for  the  destruction,  with  "on  the  site  inspection,"   of  "all   the
available   stockpiles   of   nuclear,   chemical   and   bacteriological
weapons."    They   embody,   in   a   program    of   universal   dis-
armament,   several   Western   proposals,   including   a   control
organization   with  wide  powers  of   inspection   and   "the   right
to  send   mobile  inspection   teams  to  any  point  or  any  estab-
lishment   in  the   territories   of  states."    The   third   stage   also
provides,   "The    control   organization    may,   when   necessary.
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F,  Stone's  Weekly,  June  20, 1960
Barenblatt,  Uphaus  and  Chandler  Davis  Imprisonment  Also  Cited by  Justice  Douglas
Dissenting  Judges  Protest  Inference  of  Guilt  from  Invocation  of  5th
From  the  dissent  by  Mr.  Justice  Douglas, with  whom  the
Chief   Justice  and  Mr.  Justice   Black  joined,  in  the  Kimm
case  last  Monday.  Mr.  Justice  Brennan  dissented   separately:
"It  has  become   much   the   fashion   to  impute   wrongdoing
to  or  to  impose  punishment   on   a  person   for   invoking   his
constitutional   rights.      Lloyd   Barenblatt    has   served    a   jail
sentence  for  invoking  his  First   Amendment  rights.     As  this
is  written,   Dr.   Willard   Uphaus,   as  a   consequence   of   our
decision  in  Uphaus  v.  Wyman,   is  in  jail  in  New   Hampshire
for    invoking   rights   guaranteed    to   him   by   the   First   and
Fourteenth    Amendment.      So  is   the   mathematician,   Horace
Chandler   Davis,  who  invoked   the  First  Amendment   against
the   House   Un-American   Activities   Committee.     Today   we
allow  invocation  of  the  Fifth  Amendment  to  serve,  in   effect
though   not  in  terms,   as  proof   that  an  alien   lacks  the  'good
moral   character'  which  he  must   have  under   19  (c)   of   the
Immigration  Act  in  order  to  become  eligible  for  the  dispens-
ing  powers   entrusted   to  the  Attorney  General.
No  Evidence  of  Bad  Character
"The    import   of   what   we   do   is  underlined   by   the    fact
that  there  is  not  a  shred  of  evidence  of  bad  character  in  the
record   against  this  alien.     The   alien  has   fully   satisfied  the
requirements  of  19  (c)   as  shown  by  the  record.    He   entered
as  a  student  in  1928  and  pursued  his  studies  until  1938.    He
planned   to  return   to  Korea   but   the   outbreak   of   hostilities
between  China  and  Japan  in  1937   changed  his  mind.    Since
1938   he  has  been  continuously  employed   in  gainful   occupa-
tions.    That  is  the  sole  basis  of  his  deportability.    The  record
shows   no   criminal   convictions,   nothing   that    could    bring
stigma   to  the  man.    His   employment   since   1938   has   been
as  manager   to   a   produce   company,   as  chemist,   as  foundry
worker,  and  as  a  member  of  the  OSS  during  the  latter  part
of  World  War  II.    He  also  was  self-employed  in  the  printing
business,  publishing  a  paper,  'Korean  Independence.'    No  one
came   forward  to   testify   that   he  was  a  Communist.    There
is   not   a  word   of   evidence  that  he   had   been   a  member   of
the  Communist  Party  at  any  time.    The  only  thing  that  stands
in   his   way   of   being   eligible  for   suspension   of   deportation
Preventive  War Note
Senator  MUNDT:  Isn't  the  danger  of  a  surpriise  at-
tack  such  that  the  world  has  other  assurances  besides
an  open-skies  policy  as  far  as  the  U.S.   is  concerned?
We  have  moral  compunction. ...
Former   Governor  HARRIMAN: Unhappily  some  of
our  military—and   I  won't   mention  names—have   been
going   around  the   world  at   different   times   and   dis-
cussed  the  advisability of  a  preventive  war.   That  has
not  been  helpful.
—Senate  Subcom. on Nat'1  Policy  Machinery,   June  2
by  the  Attorney General  is his  invocation  of  the  Fifth  Amend-
ment. ...
"I  had  assumed  that  invocation  of  the  privilege  is  a  neutral
act,  as  consistent  with  innocence   as  with  guilt.   We   pointed
out  in  Slochou'er  v.  Board  of  Education:  'The  privilege   serves
to  protect   the   innocent   who   otherwise   might   be   ensnared
by   ambiguous   circumstances.'     We   re-emphasized   that   view
in  Gnmewald  r.  U.S.:   'Recent  re-examination  of  the  history
and  meaning  of  the  Fifth  Amendment  has  emphasized  anew
that  one  of  the  basic  functions  of  the  privilege  is  to   protect
innocent   men.'
"We  went  further  in  Konigsberg  v.  Star  Bar and  in  Schware
i.  Board  of  Bar  Examiners  and  held  that  even  past  member-
ship  in  the  Communist  Party  was  not  by  itself   evidence  that
the   person  was  of  'bad  moral   character.
"We  therefore  today  make  a  marked  departure  from  prece-
dent   when   we   attach   a   penalty   for   reliance   on   the   Fifth
Amendment.     The   Court   in   terms   does   not,   and   cannot,
rest   its  decision  on  the   ground   that  by  invoking   the   Fifth
Amendment  the  petitioner  gave  evidence   of  bad  moral   char-
acter.   Yet   the   effect   of   its   decision   is  precisely   the   same.
In   so  holding   we  disregard  history  and,   in  the   manner  of
the   despised   oath   ex    officio,     attribute   wrongdoing    to   the
refusal   to   answer.    It   seems   to  me   indefensible   i'or   courts
which   act  under   the   Constitution   to   draw   an   inference   of
bad  moral  character  from  the  invocation  of  a  privilege  which
was   deemed   so  important   to   this   free   society   that   it   was
imbedded   in   the   Bill  of   Rights."
Harriman:  Ike's  Visit  to  Russia  An  Opportunity Lost  and  Why  K  Acted  as  He  Did
Senator  HUMPHREY: I  think  the  world  ought  to  know
that   Mr.   Khrushchev   and   the   men   in   the   Kremlin  were
afraid  to  let  the  President  of  the  United  States  come  to  the
Soviet  Union in  the  light of  what  I  think  would have  been  a
historical  breakthrough to  the  public  of  the  Soviet   Union.
Mr.  W.  Averell  HARRIMAN  [former  Ambassador  to  Rus-
sia]  :  I  am  not  sure  that  Khrushchov  didn't  want  it.   And  I
am   also   quite   sure   that  there  were   elements   within  the
Kremlin  that  were  afraid  of  it  and  didn't  want  it  from  the
very  beginning,  just,  of  course,  as  there  were  people  who
didn't  want  Khrushchov  to  come  here.   But  I  am  not   sure
that  Khrushchov was  against  it  because  he would bask  in  the
glory  of  having  produced  him.   He  wants  popular  applause.
You  know he went  back from  his  trip  to  the  United  States
.  .  .  [and]   he  boasted  and  he  said  "I  was  a  great   success
over  there, and I have become  a  great  friend of  the  President
of  the  United States,  and  I  have  brought  peace  to  you.   The
chances  of  peace  are  much  greater  as  a  result  of  my  trip."
Therefore,  he  said,  "Now  we  can  begin   to  have  a  little
prosperity,  too,  and  we  are  going  to  give  you  some  more
shoes,  and  I  am  going  to  give  you  some  more  refrigerators"
which  they  want  very  much.   And,  so,  he  was  running  on  a
platform  of  peace  and a  better  life.  .  .  .
I  think  this  [the  breakdown  of  the  summit]  began   before
the  U-2  incident. ...  I  think  somehow  or  other  he  thought
he  was  going  to  be  able  to  find  some  middle  ground   about
Berlin,  and  what  happened  to  that   I  don't   know.   In  any
event,  when  it   appeared  as   if   President   Elsenhower   was
paying  more  attention  to  the  general  approach  of  Adenauer
rather   than   Macro illan,   and   when   he   went   to   Paris   and
found  de  Gaulle's  strong   views—all  of  these  began   before
the  U-2  incident.  .  .  .
Then  I  do believe that  Mr. Khrushchov  did  offer  the  Presi-
dent  a  way  out.   Some  people  think  it  was   a  trap.         '.I   don't
agree  with  that.  I  think the  President  would  have  done  well
to  have  disassociated  himself   [from  the  U-2].  .  .  .  Khrush-
chov   gambled  his  political  position   on  the  relationship  he
developed  with  President  Eisenhower,  and he  felt  very  much
let  down.  Let  down by  the  way  things  happened.
—Senate  Snbcom. on Nat'1  Policy  Machinery,   June  2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  20, 1960
Behind  the  Court  of  Appeals  Decision  Against  An  Atomic  Power  Plant  Outside  Detroit
A  Nuclear  Gamble  With  the  Safety  of  A  Great  Industrial  Centre
Entirely   too   little   attention   is   being   paid   by   the   press
and  people  of  this  country  to  the  decision  by  which  the  Court
of   Appeals   in   the   District   of   Columbia   has   just   upheld   a
suit   by   three   AFL-CIO   unions—the   automobile,    electrical
and   paperworkers—to  stop  construction   of   a  nuclear   power
plant  30  miles  from  Detroit.    The  history  of  the  suit  reveals
how   little  the  public  knows   about  the   dangers   to  which   it
aiay   be   exposed   by   the   AEC's   evasion   of   safety   standards
in   authorizing   such   plants.     It   also   shows   the   importance
of  having  some  independent  members  on  the  AEC  and  keep-
ing  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  free  from   AEC
control.
An   application  to   build   this   reactor   at   Lagoona    Beach,
Michigan,  was  filed  in  January,  1956   by  a  specially  formed
Power  Reactor  Development  Company,  representing  14  public
utility   companies  and   7   equipment   manufacturers.     It   was
to  sell  power  to  Detroit  Edison  and  plutonium  to  the   AEC.
It  was  to  be  the  largest  "fast  breeder"   reactor  in  the  country,
a.   new    still   experimental   type  which   then   AEC   Chairman
Strauss   described  as   "the   most   hazardous  of   all    reactors."
"Administratively  Confidential"
At  the  time,  fortunately,  the  AEC  still  had  one  independent
member,  Thomas  E.  Murray  (today  it  has  none).  Mr.  Murray
first   called   public  attention   to   the   danger   of   building  such
a  reactor  so  near  a  great  industrial center  when  he  appeared
before   the   House   Appropriations  Committee   in   the   spring
of    1956.      Senator   Anderson,  then   chairman  of   the   Joint
Committee,   warned   of   these   dangers   in   a   speech,  on    the
Senate   floor.*   The   Joint  Committee   learned   that   on   June
6,   1956,   the   AEC's   Advisory   Committee   on   Reactor  Safe-
guards   had   turned   in  an  adverse  report  on   the   project   on
safety  grounds.    But.when  Governor  Williams  of   Michigan
on  the  urging of  Senator Anderson  and  Congressman  Holifield
asked   the   AEC   for   a  copy  he  was  told   it  was  "administra-
tively   confidential."
After   Governor   Williams   was   frightened   off,   reportedly
by   pressure   from   Detroit   Edison,   Anderson   urged   Walter
Reuther  and   the  auto  workers  to  take  a  hand.     A   copy  of
the   adverse  report   by  the   Advisory  Committee   on   Reactor
Safeguards  leaked  to  Leo  Goodman,   Reuther's  atomic   energy
adviser.    Admiral  Strauss,  anxious   to   fight   off  demands   in
Congress  for  public  projects  in  the  nuclear  field,  went   ahead
despite  the   adverse  report   and   on   August   4,   1956    issued
what  he  called   "a   provisional   construction   permit"   for   the
Detroit   project.    On   August   31  the  unions  filed  suit.
The  Court  of  Appeals  in  a  2-to-l  decision  by  Judge  Edger-
ton   (with   Bazelon   concurring   and   Burger   dissenting)    has
now   upheld   the   unions'   contention   that   the   issuance   of   a
"provisional   construction  permit"   was  a  device   seized   upon
* These  are  graphically described  in  the  brief  filed  by  the
unions  with  the  Court  of  Appeals.    It  says  the  fission  prod-
ucts  such  a  plant  could  release  into  the  atmosphere  "are  more
toxic  per  unit  weight  than  any  other  industrially  known  ma-
terials by  a  factor of  a  million to  a billion" and that  an  official
AEC  report indicated ''that  the  possible  damage  from  a  major
accident  in  a  large  nuclear power  plant  may  run  up  to  $7 bil-
lion,  killing  and  maiming many  thousands  of  people,  and  lay-
ing  waste  scores  of  thousands  of  square  miles  of  land."
Cheap Nuclear  Power Not  in Sight
"Chicago,  June  13  (AP)—Joseph  Harrer,  a  nuclear
scientist,   said  today  chances  were  slight   that   atomic
power  would replace  oil,  gas  or  coal  in  industry  in  the
foreseeable  future.   Mr.  Harrer,  of   Argonne   National
Laboratory,  told  the  American  Nuclear  Society   conven-
tion  that  two  decades  ago   many  scientists  had  made
'wild  plans' for  the  wide use  of  nuclear  power  for  peace-
ful  industrial purposes.   But  dollars  and  cents  have  put
a   damper  on   this,   he   said,   and  there   have   been   no
breakthroughs."
—New  York   Times, June  13.
by   the   AEC   to   circumvent   the   law.     The   law   requires   a
finding  that  such  a  project  "will  provide  adequate   protection
to  the  health  and  safety  of  the  public."   The  AEC,  unable  to
make   such   a   finding   in   view   of   the   adverse   report   by   its
own  Nuclear   Reactor  Safeguards  Advisory  Committee,   found
instead  that  the  health  and   safety   assurances  were   adequate
"for   the  purposes  of  a  provisional   construction   permit."
This  type  of  evasion,  as  Judge  Edgerton  pointed  out,  was
feared   when   the   bill   was  before   Congress.     Senator   Hum-
phrey   offered   an   amendment  from   the   floor   which   would
have  forbidden  the  AEC  to  issue  a  construction  permit  until
the   health   and   safety   provisions  had   been    fully   complied
with.     Senator   Humphrey   withdrew   the   amendment   when
Senator   Hickenlooper,   who   was  floor  manager   of   the   bill,
assured  him  it  was  unnecessary.  The  Court  agreed  with  Sen-
ator  Humphrey   that   to  issue  a  construction  permit  without
full   compliance   with   safety   provisions  would   be   a   danger-
ous  course.    "If  enormous  sums  are  invested,"  Judge  Edgerton
wrote,   "without   assurance  that   the   reactor   can  be   operated
with  reasonable  safety,  pressure  to  permit  operation  without
adequate   assurance  will   be   great   and   may  be   irresistible."
Strauss  Banked  On A  Fait  Accompli
This   is  the   situation   which  confronts  the   country   today.
More   than   $50,000,000   have   been   spent   on   the   project.
It   is   nearing   completion.      The   decision    is   already   being
attacked  as  a  blow  to  the  atomic  power   program.     The   real
blow,   if  this  decision  is  reversed,  will  be  to  the  health  and
safety   standards   of  the   Atomic  Energy  Act.     Strauss,  in  his
eagerness   to  rush  this  plant,  gambled   that  once  it  was  con-
structed   the  courts  would   shut   their   eyes  to  the   evasion   of
safety  standards,   even  in  the  case  of  a  plant  so  close  to  one
of  America's  greatest  industrial  centers.    "We  think  it  clear,"
Judge  Edgerton   ruled,  "from   the  Congressional   concern   for
safety   that   Congress   intended    no   reactor   should,   without
compelling  reasons,  be  located  where  it  will  expose  so  large
a  population   to  the  possibility  of  a  nuclear   disaster."
The   AEC  has   decided   to  appeal,   though   the  plant  may
become   a   white   elephant.      Nucleonics    Magazine    reported
May  5  that  the  designers  "have  just  about  given  up"  on  one
of   the   most   important    technical   problems    involved   in   ft.
We   believe   it   time   the   State   of   Michigan    abandoned   its
neutral  position   and  appeared,   on  appeal,  as  a  friend   of   the
court  in  support  of  the  suit.   The  unions  have  spent  upwards
of  $200,000  pro  bono  publico  in  this  action  while  Governor
Williams  has  sat  timidly  on  the  fence.
9   7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  20,
On  May 10,1955, Too,  the Russians Offered  Safeguards Against Surprise Attack
{Continued   from    Page One)
institute  a  system  of  aerial  observation   and  aerial   photography
over   the  territories   of  states."    All  this   illustrates   what  the
Yugoslav  government   meant  when  it  said  on  June  4  in  praise
of   the   Soviet   proposals   "negotiations    have   been    essentially
facilitated   by   meeting   standpoints   of   the   other   side   to   a
great  degree."
A  Way  Really  to  Liberate  East  Europe
I  am  not  saying  that  these  proposals  do  not  require  careful
examination,   particularly   the   set-up   of   the   control   organ-
ization   and   the  two-thirds vote   required  on   matters  of   sub-
stance.    All   I   am   saying  is  that   these   are   proposals   which
really   offer   a  way  to  end   the   fear   of   surprise   attack,  which
would   open   the  Soviet  Union  to  widespread   inspection   and
which—under  cover  of  disarmament—would   also  ease   many
political  problems.    One   is  to  bring  Communist  China   into
the   family   of   nations  and    friendly   relations  before    it   gets
the   H-bomb.     The   second   is  to   enable   the   East   European
satellite   states   to   pursue   their   own   independent   course   of
development—for   the  withdrawal'of   bases  also  means  with-
drawal   of   Soviet   troops   from   Poland,   Hungary,   and   East
Germany.      Indeed    there   is   implicit   in   these   proposals    a
daring  challenge  to  the  West.    If  both  sides  disarm,  we  give
up  our  means  of  protecting  property  rights  in  former   colonial
areas  and   they  give   up  the  apparatus  of   military  power  on
which  forcible  communization  depends.   Imperialism and  com-
munism   alike   rest  ultimately  on   bayonets.     Competition   of
the   two   systems   without   armed   forces   would    really   be   a
test,  a  test  which  in  my  opinion  would  encourage   more  social-
ism   in  the  underdeveloped  areas  and   more   intellectual  free-
dom   in  the  Soviet  bloc.
No   echo   of   these   great   questions   can  be  heard   in   post-
summit   oratory,  which   predominantly  stresses   the   need   for
more  weapons  on  our  part.  i.e.   for   resumption  of   the   arms
race.     In   this.  Rockefeller  and   the  Democrats   largely  agree.
The  eloquent  silence  recalls  that  of  five  years  ago  when,   on
May   10.  1955,  the  Russians  accepted   the  Western   proposals
to  synchronize  cuts  in  nuclear  weapons  with  cuts  in   conven-
tional  forces  under  an  international  control  organ.    The  Rus-
Our  Open Society
"The    Army   called   a  press  conference   yesterday   to
announce   a   significant    advance  in  anti-aircraft   rocket
defense.    Kxactly  what  the  significance  was,   the  Army
refused   to  say.    Capability  of  the  Nike-Hercules  system
has   been   tripled,   Charles   D.  Duncan   of   the   Office   of
Chief  of  Ordnance  announced.   When  asked,  'Tripled  in
comparison    with    what?'   Mr.   Duncan   said    military
security  precluded  his  answering  the  question."
—Wm.  Hines,  Wash.  Star  Science  Writer.  June  11.
sians  added  proposals  for  international  control  posts  at  ports,
railway   junctions,  main   roads  and   airdromes  to  prevent  the
mobilization   of   forces  for   surprise  attack.    After   a  first  ex-
pression   of   pleasure  from   the   Western    participants   in   the
talks,   the   whole   matter  was   dropped    from   our   side.
A  basic reason, I  believe,  was  touched  upon  in  a  Humphrey
disarmament   subcommittee   staff    report    the    follow ing   year
(July   22,   1956)    which   said   of   the   Soviet   proposals   ''By
freezing   armed   forces   and   conventional   armaments  at   the
level  of  December   31,  1954,  a  German   military  contribution
to  NATO   would   have   been   prevented.       The   rearmament
ot   Germany  was  then  as  now   a  prime  consideration  of   our
national  policy, and  a  fundamental  road-block  to  disarmament.
When   Eisenhower  went   to  the  summit  in  Geneva   a  few
months   later,  he  unveiled   instead   that  spurious  razzle-dazzle
worked  out  for  him  by  Nelson  Rockefeller,   "the  open   skies"
plan   [see   our   May   30  issue  on   its  fallacies]  which  was  al!
inspection   and   no   disarmament.      It   is   striking   that    now,
in   the  Rockefeller  challenge   to  Nixon,  amid  all   its  blowzy
sophomoric  prose,   the  very  word   "disarmament"   is  avoided.
Although   he  admits  "Never   before   in  history  have  nations
been  armed  and  able  to  devastate  one  another—in  mere  min-
utes,"   he   calls   for   S3   billion   more   in   these   weapons   of
destruction   and   at   the   same   time   says,   ''I   believe   in   the
urgent   and   formal   international   inspection   and   control   of
arms."   Again  we  have  "inspection"  and  the  ambiguous  term
"control."    "Arms   control"  has  become   a   favorite   Pentagon
term,   a   slick   substitute  for   disarmament,   a   will-of-the-wisp
which   emphasizes   "control,"  not   reduction,  of   arms.
Why   !\ot   Pass   This   On   to   A   Friend    With    the   Suggestion   He   Subscribe?
I. F. Stone's   Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
I    F   '•'tone'
I'lense  renew
street   ............
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
a  Weekly.   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.........................Zone............State....................
6/20/60
for  $2  (6  mos.)  or   S-t  (1  yr.)  additional:
.........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?          Yes  O    No  O
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone'8   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  O.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  »,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  bnt  nub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  Anzust  and  December  at  5818  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington  16  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F,   Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription•
U  In  the    TT.  8.:  *6  In  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates-  f15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED