I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jan18.pdf

============================================================

Hydro-Power  in  the Soviet,  P.  2
The Key to the  Geneva  Stalemate  May Lie in the  "Lost"  Berkner  Panel  Recommendations,  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  2
JANUARY  18,  1960
«"       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
The  Warning  on  the   Synagogue   Walls
Ever   since  the   defeat  of   Hitler,   the   problem   of   creating
a  new  Germany  has  been  frustrated  by  focusing  attention   on
small   fry   Nazis   while   the   big   offenders  went   free.      The
pattern  is still  with  us  in  the  current  furore  over  the  synagogue
scrawlings   in   West   Germany.     The   wrath   of   the   law   is
coming   down   on   a  few   screwball  nobodies   while   attention
is  diverted  from  the  extent  to  which  Adenauer's new  Germany
is  run  by  the  same  men  who  ran  Hitler's.    Hans  Globke,  the
Chancellor's  right  hand  man,  wrote  the  official  commentaries
on  Hitler's  barbaric  racial  laws.    Adenauer's  Minister  of   the
Interior,  Gerhard  Schroeder,  the  Reich's  highest  police   official,
is  a  former  Hitler  Storm  Trooper.    The  Minister  of  Refugees,
Theodor  Oberlaender,   was  an   SS  captain  assigned   to  those
renegade  Russian  troops  known  as  the  Wlassow  Army  which
was  soon  demoralized  by  the  Nazi  attitude   toward   Slavs  as
untermenschen.    Accusations  that  he  took  part  in  a  massacre
of  Polish  Jews  when  Lwow   was  occupied   in   1941   are  now
being  sifted  by  a  tribunal  at  the  Hague.    A  third  member  of
the   Adenauer   Cabinet,   Minister   of   Justice   Fritz    Schaeffer,
made  a  scandalously  irresponsible  attack   on  the  program  of
restitution   to   victims  of   Nazism.     This   lags   badly   while
Nazis   get  their  pensions   and   a  convicted  war  criminal   like
Dr.   Schlegelberger,   once   Minister   of   Justice  under   Hitler,
lives  in  comfort  on  a  pension  of  more  than  $5,000  a  year.
The  Chancellor   himself  has  admitted  that  two  out  of  three
officials   in  the   German   Foreign   Office   served  under   Hitler.
Here  in  Washington   the  Ambassador,  Grewe,   was  a  member
of  the  lawyers'  and  university  professors'  group  of  the  Nazi
party.*   The  German  Judiciary  is  packed  with  men  who  had
no  difficulty  in  serving  the  Nazis,  and  industrialists like  Krupp
and  Flick,  who  built  fortunes  on Nazi  plunder  and  slave  labor,
have  been  allowed   to  rebuild  their  empires.
Worse,  If  Anything,  Than  Nazis
It  is  not  that  these  men  retain  their  Nazi  convictions.     It
is,  if  anything,  worse.    It  is that  this  ruling  strata  of  Germans
are  composed   of   men  who   have   no   real   convictions   other
than  a  smug  faith  in  their  own  cleverness.     Had  Hitler  won,
they  would   have  been  sitting  pretty.    Once  Hitler  fell,   they
managed  to  get  themselves  out  from  under.    Then  they  were
*A  reporter  who  tried  to  confirm   this   with  the  German
Embassy   was  referred,   after   a  prolonged   run-around,  to  a
Jewish  public  relations  firm  in  New  York  which  finally  ad-
mitted  that  Grewe  had  been  denazified  in  1947  and  asked  the
correspondent   if   she'd   like  a  free   trip  to  Germany!    The
Germans  have  been  quick  to  hire  Jewish  lawyers  and  press
agents  in  this  country  as  fronts.    One Jewish  lawyer  here  in
Washington   is   both   counsel   for   the   Israeli   Embassy    and
lobbyist  (on  a  contingent  fee  basis)  for  German  big  business
interests   trying  to  recover  property  seized  during   the   war.
Confession
"Berlin,  Jan.  12  (AP)—U.S.  authorities have clamped
a  ban  on  information  to  the  press  about  former  Nazis.
A   spokesman   for   the   U.S.   mission   said   today   that
background  material  no  longer  can  be  furnished  from
the   extensive   files   in   the   U.S.   document  center   in
Berlin.    They  include  almost  a  complete  record  of  the
10  million  membership cards  in  the  Nazi  party.    The
U.S.  State  Department  feels  that the  information  might
be  embarrassing  to  the  West  German government."
—Washington  Post  and  Times-Herald,  Jan.  13.
Nazis.    Today  they  are  "democrats."    Tomorrow  they  will  be
whatever   best   advances   their   private   careers   and    fortunes.
Like  Hitler  before  them,  they  curried  favor  with  the  West  and
won  their  absolution  by  harping  on  the  Red  menace.     Like
Hitler,   they   are   quite   capable   of   making   their   pact   with
Moscow  when  they  feel  that  would  best  serve  their  interests.
The  example they  set  German  youth  is  a  cynical  one,  and   the
government   they  run   manages,  typically,   to  remain  authori-
tarian  in  spirit  though  democratic   in  form.     Dr.   Adenauer,
eter  Alte,  is  an  irascible  and  high-handed  practitioner  of   one-
man  rule  who  pays  as  little  attention  to  his  own  party  sub-
ordinates  as  he  does   to  the  opposition.    This  is  hardly  the
way  to  train  the  Germans  in  self-government.   It  must  not  be
forgotten  that  this republic has shallower  roots  than  Weimar's;
in   1918  the  German   people  overthrew  the  Kaiser  and  made
peace.    There  was  no  such  revolution   against   Hitler;   there
were  no  German  partisans  fighting  him  as  there  were  Italian
partisans  fighting  Mussolini.    The  majority  of  the  population
was  not  only  content  but  enthusiastic  with  the  booty  and  the
slave  labor  Hitler   made  available  until  he  made  the  mistake
of   losing  the  war.    Yet   this   is  the  unstable  and  unreliable
State  which  has  more  and  more  become  the  main  partner  of
American  foreign  policy  since  the  war,  vetoing  every  attempt
at  an  East-West  settlement   until  Germany  with  nuclear  arms
and  West  Europe's   largest  army  can  negotiate   its  own  deal
from  a  situation  of  strength  with  the  Russians.
Like  the  writing  on  the  wall  in  the   Book   of  Daniel,  the
synagogue   scrawlings    in    Germany    and    elsewhere    are  • a
prophetic  warning.    The  paranoia  Hitler  exploited   for   Ger-
man  nationalism  lives  on  underground  and   could   cost   man-
kind  dearly  again.    The  lesson  is  to  stop  before  we  take  the
fatal   step   of   placing   the   new   nuclear   and   thermonuclear
x^apons  in  the  hands  of  those  who  served   Hitler.    In  our
tug-of-war   with    Russia   we   have   been   conjuring   up   and
arming  a  monster.    The  men  we  have  enlisted  have  already
proven  themselves   deaf  to  human  suffering  and  devoted  only
to  self  and  national  aggrandizement.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  18,1960
Why  the  U.  S.  Power  Trust  Wishes  Russia  Would  Keep  Its  Iron  Curtain Shut  Tight
Tour  by  Three  Senators of  Soviet  Dams  Sparks Public  Power  Fight  Here
One   U.S.  industry  which  wishes  that  Russia  would  stop
lifting  the  Iron  Curtain  is  the  private   electric  power  indus-
try.    It  fears  a  glimpse  of  Soviet  progress  in  this  field  will
stimulate   public  power  in  this   country.    Through   Senator
Wallace  P.  Bennett   (R.  Utah),  power  interests  have  opened
an  attack  on  a  dramatic  report  made  public  Jan.  4  by  three
liberal   Democratic   Senators   on  the   giant   progress   in   the
USSR   (and   China)   in   hydroelectric   power   development.*
The  three,  Moss  of  Utah,  Gruening  of  Alaska,  and  Muskie
of  Maine  made  a  12,500-mile  trip  through  the  Soviet  Union
last  Fall.
Perhaps  the  most  important  story  about  the  trip  is  only
hinted  at  in  the  report.    The  Senate  Committee  on  Interior
and  Insular   Affairs   published  a  preliminary   report  at   the
end  of  1957  on  the  work  being  done  in  the  USSR  and  China
in  power  development.    In  the   middle  of   1958  the   Senate
unanimously  passed  a  resolution  directing   the  Interior  and
Public  Works  Committees  to  make  a  joint  study.   Arrange-
ments  were  made  under  the  Soviet-American  exchange  pro-
gram  for  a  visit  of  inspection  to  dams  and  power  plants  in
USSR  in  the  Fall  of  1958  by  a  delegation   to  include  repre-
sentatives  of  the  two  Senate  committees,  the  Department  of
the  Interior,  the  U.S.  Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  the  Federal
Power   Commission,   the   Tennessee   Valley   Authority    and
interested   private   organizations.
Interior  Raised Objections
Interior   Department,  which  has  been  under  the   influence
of  private   power  interests  since  the  Republicans  took   over
in   1953,   began   to   throw   up   bureaucratic   roadblocks.   It
objected  that  two  representatives   of  public  power  interests
would  be  included  in  the  trip—Clyde  Ellis  of  the   National
Rural  Electric  Cooperative  Association   and  Alex  Radin  of
the   American   Public   Power   Association.     While   Interior
held  up  the  exchange,  the  Edison  Electric  Institute,  general
staff   of  the  power  trust,  hastily   sent  two  delegations,   the
first  to  European  Russia,  the  second  to  Siberia,  turning  in
two  grudging   reports.     It   took  an  angry   series  of  letters
from  Senator  Fulbright  to  the  State  Department  before  the
way  could  finally  be  cleared  for  a  Senate  delegation  to  make
the  visit  last  Fall.   The  original  plan,  which would  also  have
allowed  TVA,  Army  Engineers  and  Federal  Power  Commis-
sion  to  have  a  look  at  Soviet  projects,  is  still  on the  shelf.
The  three  Senators  took  with  them,  along  with  Ellis  and
Radin, two  Truman  Administration  officials  with  wide  experi-
ence  in  hydroelectric  development, former  U.S.  Commissioner
of   Reclamation  Michael  W.  Straus,   and   former   Assistant
Commissioner    Harvey   McPhail.     Their    175-page    report,
ignored  or  buried  in  the  press,  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the
enormous  dams  being   erected   in  the   Soviet   world.     "The
Soviet   power   program,"   it   concludes,   "has    produced   the
largest   hydroelectric   stations   in   the   world,   yielding   the
greatest  project  volumes  of  electricity  from  the  largest  gen-
erators  connected by the  longest  transmission   lines  operating
at  highest  voltage."
China  Building the  Biggest   Dam  of  All
The  visiting   Senators  saw  Kuybyshev   Dam  which   when
completed   in   1958   took   from   Grand   Coulee   the   title   of
world's  largest;  Stalingrad  Dam,  already   operating,  which
will  be  bigger  than  Kuybyshev  when  completed  in  1961;   and
Bratsk  Dam  at  Lake  Baikal  (with  more  water  than  all  our
Great   Lakes   combined)  which  will   be  bigger   yet.     They
were  told  of  the  work  begun  on  Krasnoyarsk  which  will   sur-
pass  Bratsk  and  of  an  even  more  grandiose  project  underway
in   China.
* Relative  Water  and  Power  Resource  Development  in  the
USSR   and  the  USA,  Report  Pursuant   to  S.Res.  248,  85th
Con.  2d  Sess.  U.S.  Sen.  Comm.  on  Interior  and  Public  Works.
Atom  Better  for  War Than Peace
"Construction  of  the  limited  number  of  atom  plants
in  this  country  has  fallen  behind  schedule  .  .  .  The
costs  of  the plants  have soared .  .  .  Even  abroad,  where
power  costs  are  generally  higher,  the  pace  of  atomic
power   development   has  been  discouragingly   slow."
—New  York  Times  economic  survey  Jan. 11.
"Also  in  the  USSR  as  in  the  U.S.,  atomic power  is
not  expected  to  supply   significant   amounts  of  power
during  the  next  few  years.    The  USSR  regards  con-
ventional   sources,   both   thermal   and  hydro,  as   more
economic  and expeditious."
—Senate  report  on Soviet  power  projects.
There  the  Chinese  Communists,  utilizing  plans  first  drawn
up  by  John  Savage  of the  U.S.  Bureau  of Reclamation  during
World  War  II,  are  building  a  dam  at  the  Ichang  Gorge  on
the  Yangtze  River  which  "will   be  12  to  20  times  the   size
of  Grand  Coulee"  when  completed.   The  report  hints  at  the
need  for   a  "similar"  study  of  what   is  going   on  in  China.
It  would  be  good  if  our  first   official  exchange  of  visits  with
Peking  were  centered  about  so fundamental  and  constructive
an   activity   as  hydroelectric   power.
The  U.S.  is  still  far   ahead  of  the   USSR.    We  have  142
million   installed   kilowatts   compared  with   the   Soviet's  53
million.    But  the  Senate  committee  says  the  Russians  could
overtake  us  by  1975  unless  we  speed  up  or  they  slow  down.
The  Senate  report  is  discreetly  silent  on  one point—the  way
in which dog-in-the-manger  private  power monopolies restrict
development   in  the   country.     But   Senator   Bennett   in   an
attack   issued  so  swiftly  he  could  hardly  have  had  time   to
read  the  full   report,  says  that  "reading   between  the  lines
[our   italics],   it  is  clear  that  the  committee   staff   believes
expansion  of  our  public  power  program   is  the   key  to   our
future   in  the  power  field."
Power  Going  to  Waste  at   Grand  Coulee
The  problem  is  not  simply  one  of  expansion  but  of  more
fully  using  existing  facilities.    The report  touched  a  sensitive
point  when  it  said  the  Soviet  is  extending   its  grid   system
until   eventually   it   will   cover   the   whole   USSR.      "The
efficiency  and  economy of  shifting  peak  power  loads  over  a
geographic  area  that, embraces  seven  time  zones from  Lenin-
grad  to  Vladivostok,"  the  report  says,  "is  apparent  to  any
housewife  whose  lights  have  dimmed  at  dinner  time  when
electrical  use  is  heavy.    The  Soviet  plan  is  in  sharp  contrast
with  the  absence  of  planned  or  actual  transcontinental  trans-
mission  inter-ties  in  the   U.S.   and  the   lack   even   of   local
inter-ties  in many parts  of  the  U.S."    These  inter-ties  enable
surplus   power   quickly   to   be   switched   from   one  area   to
another  to  take  advantage  of  the  fact  that  peak  usage  varies
from  one  section  to  another.
In  this  country  private  power  companies  have  fought  grid
system   expansion,  fearing   it  would  lead  to  greater  public
control  and  ownership.   In  fact  a  major  battle  is  brewing  at
this  very  session  over  proposals  to  build  transmission  lines
which   would   make   surplus   Bonneville  power   from   Grand
Coulee  available  in  California's   Central  Valley.
The  private   companies   are  fighting  a  rearguard   action
to   delay   or  control   any   such   interchange.     They   blocked
action  at  the  last  session,  and  Interior  Department   is  help-
ing  them.    The  Senate  report   may  figure  in  the   coming
debate.   Bennett  already  attacks  it  for  the  "startling"  recom-
mendation that the  Federal  government  "embark on a  massive
program  to  build  transmission  lines  to  interconnect  Federal
projects."     Though   the   report   speaks   of    interchanging
private   power   as   well,   Bennett   says,   "Quite   clearly   the
committee   wishes   to   push   us   far   down  the   road    toward
complete  nationalization  of  power  transmission   facilities.
1
'
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  18,  1960
Nine  Months Later  Still  Little  Action  on  Scientific Report  to  White House
Bureaucratic  Fog Engulfs  Hopeful  Berkner  Proposals  on  Test  Detection
Public  attention  needs  to  be  focused   on  the   fate   of   the
Berkner   panel   recommendations.    These   could  be  the   key
to  ending  the  stalemate  in  the  Geneva  nuclear  talks.   Last
March  this  scientific  panel  reported   to  the  President   that,
despite  the  new findings  in  the  Hardtack  underground tests
the   previous   fall,   the   detection   system   agreed   upon   at
Geneva   in   1958   could  be   restored   to   full   efficiency   by   a
three-year   program  of  research  and  development  in  seismo-
logical  recording  methods.   This  would  mean  that  the  detec-
tion   system  already  agreed  upon  with  the   Russians  could
identify  90 percent  of  the  earthquakes  which  might  be  taken
for  nuclear  explosions, cutting  the  task  of  on-site  inspection
down  to  manageable  size.
Geneva System  Try-Out Recommended
When  a  summary  of  the  Berkner  report  was  declassified
and  released  last  June  12, it  was  seen  that  it  contained  a
proposed   two   year   budget   with   specific   sums   alloted   to
specific  research  and  development  projects  on  new  ideas  for
improved  detection  methods.    The  first  year   budget  called
for   $22,825,000;  the   second,  for   $30,000,000.    The  proposed
work  was  divided into  two  parts.   A  panel  of  scientists  was
to  supervise   a  coordinated  program  of  research   by   private
Exclusive  Disarmament Item
Now  We're  Studying  the  Study
"To  a  certain  extent,   the   United  States  has   been
marking  time  in  the  recent   [nuclear  test]  talks,  wait-
ing  for  completion  of  studies  in  Washington."
—New  York  Times Jan. 12 from  Geneva.
Last   July   29  the   President   appointed   Charles   A.
Coolidge  to  make  a  definitive study  of   "comprehensive
and  partial   measures  of  arms  control  and  reduction"
for   the  State  and  Defense   Departments.
We  heard  that  the  Coolidge  committee  had  already
reported  but  that  the  Administration  couldn't  make  up
its  mind  whether  to  accept  the  recommendations.    We
telephoned  State  Department  to  check  and  were  told
(1)  yes,  the  Coolidge  committee  reported   a  week  ago
and   (2)  no,  there   are  no  plans  to  make  the  report
public  and  (3)  that  is  all  we  can  tell  you.
Apparently  we  are  now  marking   time  waiting  for
completion  of  a  study  of  the   study.
Too Much Negative Thinking
"Too  much  negative   thinking   in  the   AEC  and  the
Pentagon  was  concentrated  on  proving  that  a   control
system   would  not  work  .  .  .  Too little   effort  was
expended  on  devising  a  practical  detection  system  that
would  be  politically  and  scientifically  acceptable  to  all
parties."
—Cong.  Wm.  H.  Meyer   (D.  Vt.)   to  the   President,
Jan.    6,  expressing  concern  over  his  decision  to  termi-
nate  the  U.S.  formal   ban  on  testing.
and   public  bodies.    In   addition   "a   single    well-organized
central   laboratory"   was  to  plan  and  try   out  an  inspection
system  along  the  lines  agreed  to  at  Geneva  in   1958.
This  whole program  has  been  lost  in  a  dense  bureaucratic
fog.     Inquiries  at  State  Department  elicited  no  information
beyond  a  suggestion  that  we  inquire  at  the  AEC.   The AEC
suggested  we  try  the  Defense  Department  and  the   Defense
Department  sent  us  back  to  the  AEC.  At  Coast  and Geodetic
Survey  we  did  learn  'that  "months   ago"   it  had  received  a
questionnaire  sent  out  to  public  and  private  agencies  inter-
ested   in  seismological   research   asking   what   projects   they
would  like  to  work  on.    No  reply  has  come  back.
Checking   Facts  on  File  we  found  that  last  August   Dr.
Herbert  F.  York  of  Defense  Department  research   appointed
Dr.  Prank  Press,  Caltech   seismologist,   as  head  of  a   nine-
man  panel  to  prepare  what  was  described   as  an  expanded
program  of  research  to  carry  out  the  Berkner  panel  recom-
mendations.    Dr.  Press  by  long  distance   referred   inquiries
to  Dr.  York's  office  and  to  the   office  of  the  President's  scien-
tific  adviser.    The  latter  said  it  had  no  power  to  implement
the   program   and   referred   inquiries   to   Dr.   York's     office.
There  we  learned  that  instead   of  being  expanded  the  two-
year   $50,000,000  Berkner   recommendations    have   been   in
process   of  revision  downward—about   $7,000,000  is  planned
and now  (nine months since the  Berkner  panel  first  reported)
about   $1,000,000  in  research   has  been  contracted   for.
This  molasses  pace  and  meager  expenditure  contrasts  with
the  swift  way the  AEC and the  Air  Force  have  been  carrying
on  a  program  of  non-nuclear explosions in  salt  mines  to  try
and  prove  (in  accordance with  the  Teller  "big  hole"  theory
we  discussed  last  week)  that   any  detection  system   can  be
evaded.   Both  agencies  want  resumed testing,  not  agreement.
91  Labor,  Farm  and  Business  Leaders
Ninety-one  leading  Americans,  including  many   business
men  and  seven  top  level  labor  union  executives  have   re-
leased  a  statement  through  the  National  Planning  Associa-
tion  (those  who  want  to  see  full  text  can  obtain  it   from
the  NPA  at  1606 New Hampshire  Ave.,  N.W.,  Wash.,  D. C.)
on  the  topic,  "Can  the  American  Economy Adjust  to  Arms
Reduction?"    Their  answer  is  that  it  can,  that  the   effect
would  not  be as  drastic  as  often  supposed but  that  planning
should  begin  now  for  a  change-over.    The  statement   was
given  little  attention  by- the  press.
The  NPA  analysis  believes  a  major  portion  of  the  re-
sultant  gap  in  spending  could  be  made  up  from  the  field
of  social  capital.    It  makes  a  five  year  projection  of  needs
in  the  areas  of  education,  highways  and  skyways,  urban
renewal   and   slum   clearance,    water    supply,   health   and
hospitals,   and  such  other   programs   as  air   pollution.    It
figures  330  billion  needed  in  the  next  five  years  but  only
150 billion  available  under  current  programs.
The  planning  proposed  is  planning  for  the  transition  and
not   post-disarmament   economic  planning.     The   statement
assumes  that  with  advance  planning  and  enlarged  spending
View  End  of  Arms  Race  Optimistically
on  social   capital,   "free   enterprise"  can  do  the  job.    The
seven  labor   chiefs   who  signed   were  Beirne  of   the  Com-
munications  Workers,  Hartung  of  the  Woodworkers,  Hayes
of   the   Machinists,  Carroll  of  the   Maintenance  Way   Em-
ployes,  Rieve  of  the   Textile   Workers,   Knight  of  the  Oil
Workers  and  Zander  of  State,  County  and  Municipal  Em-
ployes.    J.  A.  Brownlow, president  of  the  AFL-CIO  Metal
Trades  Dept.  and   second  echelon  executives   of  the   steel
workers,  the  Amalgamated  Clothing  Workers,  the  ILGWU
and  the  Electrical  Workers  also  signed  the   statement.
James   Patton,   president,   the  National   Farmers   Union,
and  W.  E.  Hamilton,  director  of  research,  American  Farm
Bureau  Federation,   were  signers.   Among  the  others   were
figures   as   diverse   as   Clarence   Pickett   of   the   American
Friends  Service  Committee,  Stanley  Marcus  of  the  famous
Dallas  department  store,  Eric  Johnston  of  the  Motion  Pic-
ture   Producers,   H.  M.  Horner,   chairman   of   the   board,
United   Aircraft,   and   lesser   men   from   Pillsbury,   Kraft
Foods,   Prudential    Insurance,   Bell   &   Howell   and   Vitro
Corporation.    Lauren  Soth  of  the   influential  Des   Moines
Register  & Tribune  also  signed.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   18, 1960
On  the  Ticker Tape  from  the  Capitol:  Why  the  Pentagon   Loves  Democrats
The  GOP  Is  Never  Against  Inflation  in  An  Election  Year
It  is  as  if  democracy  were  intrinsically  inflationary.    Comes
an  election  year  and  the  Republicans  are  "spenders"  like  the
Democrats—higher  wages  for  steel  workers  (with  tacit  acqui-
escence  in  higher  steel  prices  after   the  election),  bigger  ex-
penditures   on   soon-to-be-obsolete   but   not   yet   really   opera-
tional   "first  generation"   missiles  and  of  course  another   plea
for   higher   interest   rates,   another   form   of   special   interest
inflation  which  bankers  represent  as  anti-inflationary.    Benson
still  holds   the  fort   against  a  similar   Santa  Claus   operation
for  farmers,  but  it's  a  good  guess  the  GOP  will  have  to  give
on  this  front,  too .  . .
How   the   Pentagon   must   wish  for   a  Democratic   victory.
A  foretaste  of  what  the  Truman   liberals  and  laborites   would
do  if  elected  may  be  savored  in  the  pamphlet   "The   Federal
Budget  and  the  General  Welfare"   issued  by  the  Conference
on  Economic  Progress  which  is  guided  by  Leon  Keyserling,
Truman's  most  faithful   economic  adviser.    Walter  Reuther  is
the  leading  laborite  in  this  group.    This  plea  for  more  spend-
ing   provides  a  useful   survey  of   social   welfare-  needs.     But
in   projecting  an   increase  of   $23.3  billions  in   the   Federal
budget  from  fiscal  I960  to  1964,  it  allocates  almost  half  the
increase  to  the  arms  program  which  it  would  raise  from  $45.7
billion  to  $57  billion.   No  explanation  is given  for  the   $11.3
billion  increase ...
One  Bright  Spot  in  Ike's  Message
The  Republicans don't  seem  to  be  able  even  to  hire  a  good
ghost  writer  for  the  President.    The  annual  message  this  year
was  as  tepid  and  amateurish  as  usual;  the  one  cheering  note
was   Eisenhower's   acceptance   of    Humphrey's    proposal    to
repeal  the   Connally  amendment  denying  the  World   Court
jurisdiction   over   any   matter  we   consider   "domestic."      Six
governments   have   Connally   amendment  type   reservations.
Here  the  U.S.  is  in  the  august  company  of  Liberia,  Mexico,
Pakistan,  Sudan  and  South  Africa.    The  Communist  countries
including  Yugoslavia  also  have  yet  to  accept  the  compulsory
jurisdiction  of  the  court.    Passage  of  a  repealer  by  Congress
is  doubtful ...
Lyndon  Johnson  craftily  called  his  party  conference  before
the   rebels  had   time  to  organize.     The   results   demonstrated
that   few   Senate  Democrats   choose   freedom.     They   prefer
currying  favor  with  the  boss  for  committee  assignments.     The
vote   also   showed   how   firm   is   the   Southern   alliance   with
the  new  Western   and  Alaskan  liberals:  from  that  area  only
Morse   and  Carroll   (Col)    voted   with  the  insurgents.     It  is
hard  to  believe  Johnson  seriously  thinks  he  can  get  the  party
nomination  but  he  may be able  to  dictate  terms  to  the  nominee.
We  believe  the only Democrat  who  could  win  is Adlai Steven-
son—it  would  be  a  pleasure  once  again  to  have  in  the  White
House   a  President   of   stature.     Humphrey's   game   fight   de-
serves  support  (he  needs  financial  help  badly)   if  only  because
the  bigger  the  vote  for  Humphrey  in  the  primaries the  bigger
the  demonstration that  peace  and  disarmament  have   political
appeal  .  .  .
The    State   Department   is   anxious   about   Field    Marshal
Viscount  Montgomery's   visit   to  Communist  China   in   May,
which  he  announced  on  returning  to  London   Jan.   9   from
India.    Monty  told  reporters  at  the  airport  (London  Sunday
Observer.  Jan.  10)  he  thought  the  West  was  "making  a  great
mistake  in  thinking  that  the  true  government  of  China  is  in
Formosa."   .   .   .   Few   realize   the   bombing   of   Hiroshima   is
far    from    over.     Delayed   effects   take   new   victims  yearly.
Edita   Morris  tells   the   story   with   compassion  but   without
horror   in  her   delicate   novel,   "The   Flowers  of   Hiroshima"
(Viking   Press),   well-received  in   England   but   given   scant
attention  here ...
Best  Time  to  Get  Lynched
That  Justice Dept.  Press  release  last spring  about  the  Parker
lynching  was  misleading  when   it  denied  there  was  any  evi-
dence  the  Federal kidnap  law  was  violated.    A  UPI  dispatch
from   Jackson,  Miss.,   {Wash.   Post,   Jan.   9),    says  the   FBI
report  turned  over to  the  grand  jury  names  one  farmer witness
who   said   Parker  was  taken   across  the   river  into   Louisiana
before  being  shot  .  .  .  The   Crusader,  a  weekly  published   for
the  Negro  community  of  Monroe,  N.  C,  by  Robert  F.  Wil-
liams  (whom  the  NAACP  suspended  for  being  too  militant)
had   a   tart   comment  on   the   efforts   being   made   to   indict
Parker's  lynchers.    "If   you  are  going  to  be  lynched,"   it  ad-
vises,  "try  like  hell  to  hold  the  mob  off until  an  election  year."
Extra  Copies  Available  in  Bulk  Orders  ($3  per  100)    of   Last   Week's   Issue   on  the  Nuclear  Crisis   at  Geneva
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name     ........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
1/18/80
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I    F    Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  187!).    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub
lished  every  'Thursday  except   the  last  two  Thursdays   of  August  and  December  at  5018  Nebraska  Aye..  N.  W..  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$">  in   tlio   IT.  S.;  $0  in   Canada;  $10  elsewhere.     Air  Mail   ratfs:   $13  to  Europe: $20  to   Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED