I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960feb01.pdf

============================================================

The  Nuclear  Test  Bedlam,  P.  4
Our  Gumshoe Men Seem  to  Do Better  at  Catching  Daily Worker  Subscribers  Than  Spies,  See  P.  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    VIII,  NO.  4
FEBRUARY   1,  1960
°<°'       WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
What  the  Democrats   Didn't  Say  About  Nixon
That  mass onslaught of  the  Democratic candidates on  Nixon
at  the  $100-a-plate  dinner  here  last  week-end  was  a  rather
cheap and  demogogic affair,  perhaps because the  party hopefuls
keyed  their  remarks  to  the  tastes  of  former  President Truman
in  the  hope  of  winning his  favor.   To  call  the  Vice President
"a  juvenile  delinquent"  and   "a  slicker"  is  not  clever.   There
are  serious questions  to  be  answered  by Nixon.   If  the  Demo-
crats  were a  peace party, they  would  be taking advantage of  the
revelations  in  the  Eden  memoirs,  now  running  in  The  Times
of  London,  to  make  a  formidable attack  upon  the  Vice  Presi-
dent.    For  he  was  closely  allied  with  Admiral  Radford  and
Secretary  Dulles  in  what  Sir Winston  Churchill described  (see
adjoining  box)  as an  effort  to  mislead  Congress  into  approving
a  military  operation  in  Indo-China  which  might  have  brought
"the  world  to  the  verge  of  a  major  war."
Nixon  Was  A  Peace  Candidate  Then, Too
All  the  polls  show  that  Mr.  Nixon's  stock  has  risen  since
his  visit  to  Moscow.    It  is as a peace candidate that  he  will  run
for  election.   But  Eisenhower  and  Nixon  were  elected  as peace
candidates  in  1952,  too,  and  the  Eden  memoirs  are  a reminder
that  Eisenhower  had  hardly  finished  making  peace  in  Korea
when  Nixon  was  ready  to  plunge  the  U.S.  into  war  in  Indo-
China.    Though  Nixon  will  campaign  on  the  Eisenhower  rec-
ord,  there  is  much  to  make  one  wonder  whether  he  will  carry
it  on.    He  backed  MacArthur  against  Truman   in   1951,   and
his  formula  for  a  Korean  peace  as  developed   in  the  Senate
(April  11,  1951)  bore  no  resemblance  to  the  one  Eisenhower
was  to  apply  two  years  later.    Mr.  Nixon  was  for  bombing
Chinese  bases,  and  unleashing  Chiang  Kai-shek.
In  the  spring   of   1954   just  when   an   Indo-Chinese   peace
seemed  in  sight  Radford  and  Dulles  tried  to  sell  the  British
the  idea  of  joining  us  in  an  air  and  naval  strike  which  would
be  extended  to  the  Chinese  mainland  if  Peking   intervened.
The  Eden  memoirs  show  that  Churchill   rejected  the  plan  as
bound   to  be  ineffective   without   the   landing   of   troops  and
likely  to  set off a major war.   While  Radford  and  Dulles  were
trying  to  draw  the  British  into  this  adventure,  Nixon  was try-
ing  to  drum  up  support  for  intervention  at  home.    Ten  days
before  the  Geneva  conference  on  Indo-China  opened,  he  made
an  off  the  record  speech  to  the  American Society of  Newspaper
Editors  only  to  have  his  anonymity broken  next  day when  the
London  Times   implied   and  the  Paris  France-Son  stated  that
the  "high   Administration  spokesman"   being  quoted   in   the
U.S.  press  was Nixon.
Two  aspects  of  that  speech  deserve  consideration  now  when
Nixon'  is  about  to  run  as  a  peace  candidate.     One  was  the
cynical  view  he  expressed.     He  said  the  U.S.  was  "the   only
^
A  Plot  to Mislead  Congress
"I  asked  Admiral  Radford  if  he  really  thought  that
air  intervention by  the  United  States  and  the  United
Kingdom  could  decisively  alter  the  situation.    Had  the
Americans  considered  the  effect   on  world  opinion  and
how  the  Chinese  would  react?    I  said  that  I  assumed
that  they  [Dulles  and  Radford]  had  not  forgotten  the
Russo-Chinese  alliance.   It  was  possible  that if  we  went
into  Indo-China  we  should  find  ourselves  .  .  .  heading
for  a  world  war.   Admiral  Radford  replied that  he  had
never   thought   the   Chinese  would  intervene  in  Indo-
China,  nor  had  they  the  necessary  resources  available.
If  they  attempted air  action, we  could eliminate this  by
bombing  the  Chinese  airfields. ...  I  drove  to  Chequers
to  give the Prime Minister  a full  report..  . . Sir Winston
summed  up  the  position  by  saying  that  what  we  were
being  asked  to  do was  to  assist  in  misleading  Congress
into  approving a  military  operation  which  would  in  it-
self  be ineffective  and  might well bring  the  world to  the
verge  of  a  major  war."
—Eden's   Memoirs,   London   Times,  Jan.  11.
country that  is strong  enough  politically at  home  to  take a  posi-
tion  that  will  save  Asia,"  i.e.  to  disregard  the  popular  demand
for  negotiation  and  peace.    He  thought  the  American  people
uninformed  and  their  wishes  to  be  ignored.    "With  regard  to
the  view  that  it  might   be  politically   expedient   to  agree   to
negotiations  with  Red  China,"  the  New  York  Times  reported,
"he  said  that  if  the  United  States  left  its  policy  to  an  unin-
formed  public  opinion,   it  would  go  down  the  long  road  to
disaster."    "With  or  without  the  support  of  public  opinion,"
he  was  quoted  as  saying,  "if  the  situation  in  Indo-China   re-
quires  that  American  troops  be  sent  there  to  prevent  the  area
from   disappearing  behind  the  iron  curtain,  the  Administra-
tion   must   face   the   issue   and   send   the   troops."     Eisen-
hower  did  face  the  issue,  and  on  advice  of  General  Ridgway
among  others,  decided  not  to  send  them.   What  if  Nixon  had
been  President?
Nixon Was Wrong About Vietnam
The  other  aspect  of  this  affair  which  deserves  attention  now
is  the  bad  judgment  Nixon  shared  with  Radford  and  Dulles.
They  took  the  apocalyptic  view  that  a  truce  and  partition  of
Vietnam  would  be  "the   end  of  southeast  Asia."    They   were
wrong.     The   situation  has  been  stabilized,  the  bloodletting
stopped.     Humphrey   challenged   Nixon  on  this  at  the   time.
Perhaps  the  Democrats  are  inhibited  from  opening  up  on  the
reliability  of  Nixon  as a  peace  candidate  because  they  fear  that
Truman   and   Acheson   may  feel   the   same  way  about   Indo-
China  as did  Nixon  and  Dulles.    The  Democrats  would  rather
drum  up  the  arms  race  than  search  for  peace.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February   1, 1960
On the  Capitol Ticker Tape;  Still  No  U.S.  Policy  on  Disarmament
The  French  Crisis  Threatens  to  Upset  Summit  Meeting  and  Arms  Talks
DE   GAULLE:   The   French   crisis   is  a  world   crisis.     It
threatens  not  only  to  disrupt  plans  for  the  summit   meeting
and  new  East-West arms  talks  but  could  set in  motion  the  most
dangerous kind  of  chain  reaction.    Should  the  Army take  over,
should  the  Algerian   struggle   lap  over  into  Tunisia,   should
there  be  a  Left-Right  struggle   in  France,  the  U.S.   and  the
U.S.S.R.  might  find  themselves  drawn  in  on  either  side.   The
whole  African  continent   is  explosive   with   race   resentments,
and  the  Camp  David  detente  is very  precarious  anyway.
THE  PRICE  OF  RACISM:  The  ability  of  France  to  build
an  atom  bomb  but  not  to  run  a  stable  government  is  a  symbol
of  our  times.   Men  can  make  new  monsters  of  destruction  but
remain  feckle  and  feeble-minded  in  tackling  the  task  of  learn-
ing  to  live  together   peacefully.    The  Army  connived-in  up-
rising  of  the  Algiers  "poor  whites"  and  Fascists  is  only  one
manifestation    of   what   is   happening   wherever   colonial   or
colored  peoples  ask  for   equality  with   white.     Government,
education,  normal  civilized  inhibitions  break  down.   The  price
of  racism  is heavy  everywhere.
CIVIL   RIGHTS:   The   Lyndon   Johnson   candidacy,   sup-
ported  by  Rayburn,  requires  some  action  on  civil  rights  and
explains  the  leak  to  the  New  York  Times  of  the  names  so  far
signed  to  the  discharge  petition  in  the  House.    Access  to  this
list  is  closely  guarded  and  the  names  could  have  been  obtained
only  with  the  connivance  of  the  leadership.
VOTING  REGISTRARS:  The  proposal  by  Attorney  Gen-
eral Rogers  for  Court-appointed  voting  registrars backed  by the
weapon  of  civil  contempt   (no  jury  trial)   gives  the  Adminis-
tration  the  election  year  initiative  in  this   field.   It  seems  at
first  glance   less   cumbersome   than   the   Humphrey   bill   (S.
2814)   for  the  appointment  of  temporary  Federal  registrars  by
the President.
'   DISARMAMENT:   The  five-power   group   which    began
working  here  last  Monday  on  formulation  of  a  joint  Western
attitude   in   the   East-West   arms   talks    (scheduled    to   begin
March   15)   discovered   that  U.S.   agencies  still  don't  have  a
common   policy.     Defense  Department—if   not  State—would
be  relieved  if  the  nuclear  talks  broke  down  because  it  could
then  argue  there  was  no  point  in  proceeding  to  negotiate  on
other,  more  complex,  matters.
Then Kennedy Drafted  Bowles
We  went  through  a   5,000  word  speech  by  Chester
Bowies  before  the  Women's  National  Democratic  Club
here  Jan.  21  to  see  what  he  had  to  say  about  the  arms
problem,  and have culled  for  our  readers  his pronounce-
ments  on  the  subject.   "In  the  absence  of  a  tightly con-
trolled disarmament system," the  Connecticut Congress-
man  said,  "it  is  clear that  we  cannot  afford  to  have only
the  second  best  system   in  a  world  where  each   year's
ultimate  weapon  may  become  obsolete  in  the  following
year."   This  must  have  struck his  listeners  as  reassur-
ingly  like  their own  millinery  problem: last  year's  mis-
sile  like  last  year's  hat.
Mr.   Bowles   also   explained   that   "our   quest   for   a
meaningful  and  lasting  peace  in  itself  spans  a  host  of
issues.     It  involves  our  need  for  a  more  adequate  de-
fense  and at  the  same  time a  more realistic  approach  to
tightly   controlled  disarmament  agreements   that   will
ease   the   incredibly   dangerous   arms   race."     There's
nothing  like  a  realistic  approach.   Finally  Mr.  Bowles
waded  in  on  the  problem of  military  reorganization  and
said  "we  need  a  clear  and comprehensive reappraisal of
our  defense  system  which will  cut  through  the  fog  of
overlapping  authority,  confusion,  inadequate  planning
and  procurement,  and  waste  which  now  beclouds   it."
When  fog  gets  beclouded, it  is  time  to  call  a  halt  and
put  our  shoulders  to  the  wheel.
Mr.  Bowles  ended  on  a  high  note.    He  said  we  faced
a  challenge  "more  than  military,  more  than  political.
It  goes  down  to  the depths of  our being—straight  to  the
meaning  of  life  itself,"  and  imposed  on  Democrats  the
obligation  to  provide "the  clear  voice,  the  keen  analysis
and  the wide vision  .  .  . our nation  has  misaed  for  seven
years."
Three  days  later  Senator  Kennedy  invited  Mr.  Bowles
to  be  his  foreign  policy  adviser,  and  supply  his  cam-
paign  with  more  of  that  wide  or  Vista   vision.
GOD  AND  GOEBBELS:  Adenauer's  statement  at  a  special
audience with Pope John,  "I  think that  God has given the  Ger-
man  people  a  special  role  in  the  present  stormy  times—to  be
the  guardians  of  the  West  against  those  powerful   influences
which  are  brought  to  bear  on  us  from  the  East",  was  omitted
from  the  official  Vatican  report,  perhaps  lest  some  cynic  con-
clude  God  had  taken  over  where  Goebbels  left  off.
Hopeful  Report  on  Kremlin  Attitude  Toward  Disarmament  by  Nobel  Prize   Winner
Philip  Noel-Baker,  veteran  Laborite  MP,  winner  of   the
1959  Nobel  peace  prize  for  his  lifelong  devotion to  the  cause
of  disarmament,  flew  to  the  U.S.  to  address  the  dedication
dinner  of  the  American  Jewish Committee's Institute of  Hu-
man  Relations Jan. 23.   Only  the  New  York  Times  seems  to
have  covered  his  speech.  This  is  from  the  report in  the  early
edition  of  the  Times  Sunday, Jan. 24.
Mr.  Noel-Baker  said  that  on  the  basis  of  his  talks  with
Premier  Khrushchov  last  year  he  was   convinced  that  the
Soviet  Union  was  prepared to  disarm drastically  and  to  ac-
cept  strict  controls  if  the  Western nations will  do  likewise.
"They  know," Mr. Noel-Baker said  of  the  Kremlin leaders,
"that  if  the  arms  race  goes  on  they  cannot  raise  -their  na-
tional  output of  wealth  per capita until  it  equals that of  the
U.S.   and  that  is  their  declared  objective  for  1970.    They
know,  second,  that  if  the  arms  race  goes  on  it  will  all  too
likely  end  in  general  nuclear  war;  and  they  know  that  not
much  would  survive  in  Russia  and  certainly  not  the  Com-
munist  system  to  which they  have  given  their  lives."
Attributing  to  the  Soviet  leaders  "a deep  and genuine  con-
viction",  he  declared  they  had  a  much  more  vivid  under-
standing  of  what  these  modern  weapons  mean  than  many
people  in  authority  in  the  West."  Mr. Noel-Baker  contended
that   Premier  Khrushchov  could  not   be   proved   insincere
"until  we  try  a  serious  negotiation  with  him  and  until  we
make  it  plain  that  we  want  & serious  result."    He  warned
against  just  saving  a  little  money,  keeping  the  bulk  of  the
armament   we  possess,   allowing  our  military  research   to
perfect  new  and  more  deadly  weapons  every  year.
On  the  other  hand,  he  said,  until  serious   negotiation  is
tried  "Mr.  Khrushchov can  prove  us  insincere  to  the  two-
thirds  of  humanity  who  watch  the  arms  race  with  growing
fear  and with  a  desperate  feeling  that  there  is  nothing  we
can  do.    To  keep  up  the  arms  race,  Mr.  Noel-Baker  said,
would  not  protect  democracy  but  kill  it  "stone  dead."    He
observed  that  although  the   Soviet   Union,   under  disarma-
ment,   might   not   change   its   economic   system,   it   would
"cease  to  threaten  all  mankind."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  February   1, 1960
Our  Gumshoe  Men Better  at  Catching  Daily  Worker  Subscribers  Than  Spies
Mr.  K's  Joke  to  Allen  Dulles  Recalled  in  NATO  Officer's  Arrest  As Agent
In  a  sensational  front  page  story  Jan.  18  the   Conservative
London  Daily  Telegraph   said  "American  screening  is  blamed
by  Western  counter-espionage  officers"  in  the  discovery  that  a
German  NATO   officer   was  spying  for   the   Russians.     The
story  named  Lt.  Com.  Horst  Ludwig,  said  he  had  spent  four
months  in  a  sensitive position  in  the  Lossiemouth  Royal  Naval
Air   Station,  and   reported   that  British   Intelligence   believed
him  responsible  for  leaking  certain  Baltic  naval  operations  to
the  Russians.    "Even   more  serious,"  the  London   paper  re-
ported,  "is  the  knowledge  of  Western   anti-submarine  plans
which  Ludwig  may  have   gained."
Now  Ludwig,  brought   to  trial  in  Germany,  has  confessed
that  he  had  been  a  Soviet  intelligence  agent  since   1954,   and
that  he  received  Soviet  instructions  while  he  was  taking  flight
training  at  Pensacola,   Fla.,  in   1956   and   1957.     Lt.   Ludwig
was cleared  by U.S.  intelligence  authorities  although  it  appears,
according  to  the  Daily  Telegraph,  that  his  dossier  showed  he
had  parents  living  in  East  Germany   (and  was  therefore  sub-
ject  to  blackmail)  and  that  he  had  a  sister  in  West  Germany
who  had  been  able  to  flee  the  East  with  all  her  furniture,  ob-
viously  no  ordinary  escape.    This  sister  is  on  trial  with  him,
charged  with  having  been  a  go-between.
Third  Case  of  Its  Kind
It  is a  pity  there  is no  Congressional   committee  with  power
to  look  into  intelligence  operations.    Despite  the  fact  that  the
U.S.  probably has  the  most  extensive  net  of  intelligence  opera-
tives  outside  the  Soviet  Union,  with  dossiers  covering  a  sub-
stantial  portion  of  our  population,   and  that  we  possess  elab-
orate  screening  procedures  for  all  kinds  of  government,  indus-
trial  and  maritime-  workers,   this  is  the  third   time  in   recent
years  that  espionage has  turned  up  in  sensitive  positions.   The
first was  the  discovery  of  Judy  Coplon  in  the  internal  security
division  of  the  Justice  Department  with  access  to  all  kinds of
inside  FBI  information;  the  second,   the  conviction   of  Joseph
Peterson  for  slipping   secret  material  to  the  Dutch  from   the
National  Security  Agency.
All  three  cases  show  the  failure  of  normal  security  screening
operations.    These  reflect  so  strong  an  obsession  with  left-of-
centre  political  associations  and  opinions  that  they  may  well
facilitate  the  work  of  espionage   by  distracting   energies  and
attention  from  normal   counter-espionage.     A  spy  who   is  so
unsporting  that  he  never  subscribed  to  the  Daily   Worker   or
marched   in  a  May  Day  parade  can  easily  slip  through   the
clearance   standards   our   agencies   use.     Peterson    was   only
caught  when  his  superiors  noticed  top  secret  papers   missing;
Judy  Coplon   came  under  suspicion   because  of  a  jealous  Rus-
$327,000  More for  Walter
A  resolution  giving  the  Un-American Activities Com-
mittee  another  $327,000  was  passed  Jan.  20  without ad-
vance  notice,  discussion  or  record  vote  while  few  mem-
bers  were  on  the   floor.   Next  day  Congressman  James
Roosevelt  (D.  Cal.)  told  the  House:
"Frankly  .since  this  is  a  controversial  committee and
its  manner  of  operations  and  its  actions  have  created
controversy,  and I  might  say  confusion,  I  cannot  under-
stand  why  it  was  felt  necessary  to  push through  the ap-
propriation  on  a  day  when  legislation  was  not  antici-
pated.    Under  these  circumstances,  any  effort  to  speak
in  opposition   to  the  appropriation  would  have   meant
very  little  in  the  final  outcome.
"If  a  rollcall  had  been  taken  on  this  matter,  I  would
have  voted  against   the  appropriation,   because   I   sin-
cerely  believe  that  the  taxpayer's  money  is  not  being
put  to  full  and fruitful  use.    The committee's  work  has
not  resulted  in  substantive  legislative  programs  or pro-
posals  in  the  field  of  internal  security,  the  purpose  for
which  the  committee presumably was  created.
"At a future date in this  session,  I shall  document the
fact  that  the  work of  the  committee has  been  in hit-and-
run  endeavors which have  made  headlines  but  have  not
resulted   in   concrete   accomplishments.    The   abortive
foray  into  California  is  one  of  the  latest  examples.    I
shall  also  show,  as  I  attempted to  do last  session,   that
other  agencies  of  government are  more effective  in  han-
dling  matters  involving  our  internal  security,  without
fanfare."
This  was  rather  tepid,  but no  other  Congressman  said
as  much.    Mr. Roosevelt's  office  says  he  is  preparing  a
speech  against  the  Committee  for  delivery  soon.    Ask
your  Congressman  if  he  will  speak  up,  too.    It  will  be
shameful  if  the  highly  advertised  liberal  bloc  fails  to
support  Mr.  Roosevelt.
sian's  wife;  Ludwig  was  exposed  by  a  defecting  East  German
security   officer.     None  of   these   were   exactly   triumphs   of
counter-espionage.
There  is  another  piquant  angle  to  the  Ludwig   case.    One
newspaper   (Wash.  Post,  Jan.  26)   reports  he  may  have  been
cleared  because  he  once  worked  as  a  U.S.  counter-spy  in  East
Germany;  another   (NY    Times,  Jan.   26)   because   Ludwig's
father  was  "a  double  agent  employed   by  both  Western  and
Communist   intelligence  services."    This  recalls  a  jocular  re-
mark  by  Khrushchov  to  Allen  Dulles  when  he  met  the  CIA
Chief  at  a  White  House  dinner.    The  Soviet  Premier  said  he
read  the  same  reports  Dulles did  and  maybe they  ought  to  save
money  by  merging  their  services!    One  wonders  whether  the
CIA  apparatus  may not  sometimes  be  a  handy  avenue  for  the
entrance  of  enemy  agents.
Hennings  Protests  Move  to  Allow  Faceless  Informers  Again  in  Plant  Security
In  a  letter to  Secretary  of  Defense  Gates Jan.  22,  Senator
Hennings  protested  the  reported preparation of  an  executive
order  again  permitting faceless  informer  procedures  in  the
industrial  security  program.   The  Senator  recalled  that  last
July,  after  the  Supreme  Court  invalidated  such  procedures
in  the  Greene  case,  he  asked  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and
the  Attorney General to  present  their  views  on  a  new  secu-
rity, program  before  the  Senate  subcommittee  on  constitu-
tional  rights.    Both  declined  but  the  Senator   said  he  was
promised  that  before  any  action  were  taken  the  Secretary's
views  would  be  given  the  committee.
Hennings  told  the  Senate  the  same  day  that  despite  a
clearly  unfavorable   Supreme  Court  decision,  the  proposed,
executive  order  would  still  permit  the  exemption  from  con-
frontation  of  both  "professional  informers"  and  "casual  in-
formants."   He  said  he  had  asked  the  Secretary  to  appear
before  his  committee.   We  hope  Senator  Hennings  will  hold
hearings  and  explore  the  growing  record  of  screwballs  and
gossips   who   have   hidden   behind   the   faceless   informer
practice.
1  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  1,  1960
Plain  Words Twisted:  Now  It's  the  Danger  of  Secret Blasts in the  Himalayas
The  Controversy  Over  Nuclear  Test  Cessation  Grows  Ever  Wackier
A  silly,  intemperate  and   dishonest   speech   (see   adjoining
box)   was  made  by  AEC  Commissioner  John  F.  Floberg  here
in  Washington  Jan.  21  before  the  armament  selling  American
Ordnance   Association.     He   accused   the   Soviet   scientists  in
Geneva  talks  of  furnishing  "not   a  scintilla  of  scientific  infor-
mation"  and  of  trying  to  sell  "a  pig  in  a  poke"  because  they
proposed   "to  conclude  an  early  agreement   on  the  cessation  of
tests,  establish  a  control  system,  and  improve  it  on  the  basis  of
practical   experience."
We  don't  know  why so sensible  a proposal  should  send  Mr.
Floberg  into  such  a  lather;  only  a  few  days  ago  the  British  at
Geneva  made  a  similar  proposal,  suggesting  that  the  quota  of
veto-free   inspections  offered  by  the  Russians  be  made  provi-
sional,  and  adjusted  in  accordance  with  the  greater  knowledge
obtained  through  joint  operations.
Mr.  Floberg   also  picked  on  a  passage   in  Premier   Khrush-
chov's  address  to  the  Supreme   Soviet  Jan.   14  in  which   the
latter  said  "let   us  concede"  that  there  may  not  be   "absolute
certainty"   in   detection   apparatus,   .still   an   agreement  would
place  "great  responsibility"  on  the  signers  and  any  violators
would  "cover  themselves  with  shame"  and  "be  branded  by  all
the  peoples  of  the  world."   This  set off Mr.  Floberg  into  some
hysterical  remarks about  Budapest.
Maybe the  Abominable Snowman Might Help
An  off-the-record  briefing with  the  earmarks  of  being  from
the  same  source  landed  on  page  one  of  the  New   York  Times
Jan.   27  with   a   new  angle  which   must   make  the   Russians
wonder  about  the  mentality  they  are  dealing  with.    The  story
gave  a  strangely  twisted  interpretation to  the  fact  that  Khrush-
chov  in  the  same  speech  pledged  himself  not  to  resume  testing
in  the  Soviet  Union  if we  didn't.  This was  interpreted  to  mean
that  Khrushchov  would   feel  free  to  test   outside   the   Soviet
Union!    It  was  suggested   that  there  were  many  areas  where
he  could  do  so  "without  violating this  pledge—particularly  in
the  foothills  of  the  Himalaya mountains."    Somebody  had  bet-
ter  see a psychiatrist.
Adding  to  this  bedlam  was  a  new  speech  by  Dr.   Edward
Nothing  Like A Little Old Atom Bomb
To  Create Peace  and  Friendship
"Much  has  been  discussed  regarding  the  effect  of  the
atomic  bombs  on  concluding  World  War  II,  and   one's
proximity  to  Japan  at  that  time  has  considerable  bear-
ing  on  his  views  on  that  question.  Regardless  of  differ-
ences  of  opinion, however,  it  is  indisputable that  on  the
day   following  the   second   of   those   drops,  there  were
initiated  not  only  proceedings  for  peace  but  also  for  the
laying  of  a  foundation  of  friendship,  mutual  reliance,
and.mutual  respect  which  finds  our  country  and  Japan
closely  cooperating  in  the  safeguarding  of  democracy
and  which  brings  her  Premier  to  this  country  at  this
very  time  as  an  honored  guest."
—U.S.  Atomic  Energy   Commissioner  John  F.   Flo-
berg,  addressing   Washington,  D.  C.  Post  of  the  Ameri-
can  Ordnance   Association,  January   21.
Teller,  on  the  occasion  of  being  given  an  honorary  doctorate
of  science  by  Fordham,  which  has  already  distinguished  itself
academically  by making  Louis  Budenz  a  professor.    Dr.  Teller
advocated   continuance   of   testing  not   only   underground   but
in  interplanetary  space.     The   Federation   of   American  Scien-
tists  held  a  poorly  covered  press  conference  that  same  night  in
New  York  to  try  and  inject  some  saner  notes  into  the  discus-
sion  but  a  report  on  this  had  not  arrived  by press  time.
In  the  meantime  it  may  help  to  clarify  matters  if  we  keep
two  things  in  mind.    One  is  that  the  controversy   over  detec-
tion  revolves  between  two  negative  propositions.     One  is  that
we  cannot  be  absolutely  sure  of  distinguishing  a  small  nuclear
explosion  from  a  small  earthquake.  The  other,  as  stated  by  the
Geneva  experts  in  1958,  is that  under  the  control  system  then
agreed   on  no  violator  could   be  absolutely  sure  of   escaping
detection.    The  choice  is a choice  of  risks.
The   second   point  is  that  the   risk   is  not   very  substantial
since  one  illegal  test  wouldn't  produce  enough   to  be  worth
the   trouble   and   the   probabilities  of   detection   would   rise
sharply  with  the  number  of  illegal  tests.    This  whole  business
is  a nightmare  dreamed  up  by men  who  want  to  go  on  testing.
Thanks  for   the  Gift   Subs  Coming  In  With  Renewals—They   Help   Us  Fight  Rising  Costs
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew   (or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
2/1/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State.......»...........
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  Q
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebrosko  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every   Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   5018  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   P.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   U.  S.:  $6  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to   Israel,   Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED