I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jul11.pdf

============================================================

Sinister  "Sleeper"  in  New  Passport  Bill,  P.  2
Some  New  Revelations   About  Uranium  Prices  and  the  Nuclear  Arms  Race,  See  Page  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  27JULY   11,  1960
S^ '°'     WASHINGTON, D. C.
15  CENTS
Botching  the  Cuban  and  Sugar  Problems
Congress  last  week-end hurriedly  passed  a  botched-up  sugar
quota bill  few  members  understood,  and  set  in  motion  a  chain
reaction  that  may  end  by  ruining the  last  U.S.  investments in
Cuba.   Under  sudden  pressure  from  a  President who  seems  to
have   been  spending  most  of   his  time  playing  golf   since  he
reached  Hawaii  on  his  way  home,  Congress  was  forced  into
passing  a  piece  of  legislation  involving  complex  questions  of
economics  and   foreign   policy  without  committee  hearings  or
adequate  floor  debate.   Indeed  most  of  the  work  on  the  bill
was  done  by  a  corps  of  lobbyists representing  rival  sugar  in-
terests  while  a  sleepy  House  and   Senate  waited  to  ratify   the
results.   The   Sugar  Act  of   1937  was  a  successful  experiment
by  the  New   Deal  in  stabilizing  the  sugar  market  and  wiping
out  such  social  evils  as child labor  in  the  beet   fields.   Its  latest
embodiment,  the  4-year Sugar  Act  of  1948,  expires at  the  end
of  this  year  but   little  had   been  done  about  its  extension  be-
cause  of  the  unsettled  Cuban  situation.
Good  Sense Ignored
Since   a   major   aim   of   Castro's   domestic  policy  is  to   end
Cuba's  dependence  on   a  one-crop  economy,  it  was  clear  that
we  would  be  getting  less  sugar   from  Cuba  during  the  next
four  years even  under  the  best  of  circumstances.  The  problem,
sensibly  considered,  was  to  negotiate  a  revision  downward  of
the  Cuban  quota,  using  the  negotiations to  save  for American
interests  part  of  their  sugar  mill  investments,  and  to  arrange
a  payment  plan  for  expropriated   U.S.  properties.   Only  by  such
an  orderly negotiation could  we  hope  to  keep  the  sugar market
stable  and  to  make  new  firm  commitments  to  domestic  and
other  foreign  sugar  growers  who  can fill the  gap  of  a declining
Cuban  output.   Ellender  of  Louisiana  pointed  out  that  in  any
case  42  percent  of  the  sugar  now  being  produced   in  Cuba   "is
owned  and  controlled  by  Americans"  so  that  we  would  be  in
danger  of  cutting  off  our  nose  to  spite  our  face.
Confronted   by  the  first  real  social  revolution  Latin   America
has  had  since  the  Mexicans  overthrew  Diaz,  not  only  conserva-
tive  but  liberal  members  of  Congress  so  completely   lost  their
balance  that  the  more   dangerous   consequences   of  what   they
were  doing  went  unmentioned.    The  Charter   of  the  Organi-
zation   of   American   States,   for   example,   forbids   (Art.    16)
the   kind   of   economic   warfare   we   are   preparing   to   wage
against  Cuba.    We  have  everything  to  lose  by  a  conflict  with
the  Castro  regime.   Mexico's   seizure  of  our  oil  properties  and
Bolivia's  of  the  tin  mines,  like  Nasser's  more  recent  expropria-
tion  of  the  Suez  Canal,  demonstrate   that  property  rights  can
no  longer  be  enforced   by  military  means.   We  cannot   march
into  Cuba  as  Russia  marched  into  Hungary;  the  Russians  had
an  army  on  the  spot  and  a  local  political  apparatus  to  do  their
bidding;  we  would  have  to  make  landings  on  a  hostile  coast
against  a  united  people,  for  the  Cuban   revolution  unlike   the
Nobody  Soft  on  Castro
Mr.  RIVERS  (D.S.C.):  We*should  reassert  the  Mon-
roe  Doctrine.     We  should  threaten  Castro  with  block-
ade.   We  should,  if  necessary,  and,  if  conditions demand
it,  occupy  Cuba.  .  .  .
Mr.  BOW  (R.  Ohio):  Does  not  the  gentleman  feel  it
is  inconceivable  that  today  and  yesterday  we  heard  of
American    property    being    confiscated    because    they
would  not  refine  the  crude oil  from  Communist Russia?
Mr.  RIVERS: Think  of  such  a  thing. Think of  what  is
happening—Castro's   communism—both    must    be   de-
stroyed.
Mr.  BOW:  And  we  are  not  doing  anything  about  it.
Our  State  Dept.  as  of  this  date  has  not  yet  said  what
they  are  going  to  do.
Mr.  RIVERS:  Of  course  not.
Mr.  BOW: And  it  is  high  time  we  tell  them.  .  .  .
Mr.  RIVERS:  The  policy-makers  are  out  of  step  with
the  people of  America.   American  feeling  has  nobody  to
tell  Castro how  we  feel.    God save  America.  .  .  .
Mr.  McCORMACK  (D.  Mass):  There  was  no  member
of  that  Agriculture  committee,  Republican  or Democrat,
that  was   soft   on  Castro,  was  there?
Mr.  QUIE  (R.  Minn):  There  was  not  one.
—House  debate  on sugar  quota  bill,  June  30.
Hungarian   one   was  not   imposed   from  above  by  a  minority
with  alien  military  backing.   But  to  be  "soft   on  Castro"   has
become  as  dangerous  a  political  sin  as  to  be  "soft   on   Com-
munism"—even  Charlie  Porter  of  Oregon  now  runs  with  the
pack.   Allott  of  Colorado  called  Castro's   regime  "worse  than
Batista's"  and  Morse  dismissed  him  as  "a  Communist  tyrant,"
leaving   little   discernible  difference   between xthem   and   such
anti-Castro  Fanatics  as  Dodd  and  Keating.
Not  a  single  vote  was  cast  against  the  proposition  of  letting
the  President  use sugar  for  economic  war.  Only  Meyer  of  Ver-
mont  interjected  the  hope  at  the  end  that  we  were  not  going
to  see  a  new  Hungary  in  Cuba  and  the  enlightened  North
Carolinian  Cooley,   chairman  of  House  Agriculture,  admitted
the  reluctance   with  which   he  was  acquiescing   in  a  plan   to
upset  a  24-year  relationship  with  Cuba  during  which  it loyally
kept  to  its side  of  the  bargain  even  during  the  war  "when",  as
he  pointed  out,  "world  market  prices  were  substantially   above
our  own  domestic  prices."   A  Congress  blinded  by  anti-Com-
munism   seemed   intent   on  pushing  Castro   further   into   the
arms  of  the  Soviet  bloc.
The  simple-minded   way that  members  of  Congress  indulged
in  rhetoric   about   Communist   slavery  in  Cuba  contrasts   with
what  may  be  found   in  the  independent   Left   press  here  and
abroad   which   agrees  that   the  Cuban   revolution   is  a  peasant
revolution  of  an  indigenous   type,  maintaining   many  kinds  of
private  property  holdings.  This  is  the  view  I  understand   that
(Continued   on  Page   Pour)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  11, 1960
Unnoticed  Hidden  Sleeper  May  Carry  Threat  to  Sane  Nuclear Policy  Group
Senate  Liberals  Move  to  Block  Dodd-Keating  Passport  Bill
Liberal   forces   in  the   Senate  are  digging   in  to   block   the
Dodd-Keating   (S  2652)   passport  bill  when  the  session  re-
sumes  after  the  conventions,  but  they  will  need  help   and  a
note  to  your  Senators  would  be  wise.   Both  the  New    York
Times  and  the   Washington    Post  have  come  out  against  the
bill,  but  there  is  a  dangerous  undercurrent  among   Democrats
on  Capitol  Hill  to  "demonstrate  that  we're  not  soft  on  Com-
munism."
Senators  Morse  and  Clark  both  entered  objections  as  soon
as the  bill was reported  from  the  Judiciary  Committee June  30,
and  this  will  keep  it  from  slipping  through   on  the  consent
calendar.   On  July  1,  Senator  Fulbright  served  notice  that  if
the  bill  came  up  he  would  move  for  its  referral  to  the  Foreign
Relations  Committee.  Under  the  rules  of  the  Senate,  passport
legislation  is  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Foreign   Relations,  and
Fulbright  warned  Senator  Eastland  last  September  12  in  a  let-
ter  he  read  to  the  Senate  July  1  that  the  Dodd-Keating   bill
was properly  in  the  domain  of  Foreign  Relations.
A  Product  of  Internal  Security Committee
It  is  clear  that  Dodd  used  his  position  as  vice  chairman  of
the  Internal  Security subcommittee of  Judiciary  to  ram  through
without  hearings   a  bill  which  was  not   properly  within   the
jurisdiction  of  his  committee.
The  Dodd-Keating   bill  is  much  more  restrictive  than  HR
9069  which  the  House  passed  last  September.   The  House  bill
would  bar  travel  to  members  and  supporters  of  the  Commu-
nist  party  since  1951;   the  Dodd-Keating   bill  adds  a  section
allowing  earlier  past   activity  to  be  taken   into  account.    The
House  bill  says no  passport  may  be  denied  or  revoked  "except
after  opportunity  for  a  hearing,"  and  it  was  declared  on  the
floor during  debate  on  passage  that  this  meant  a  real  hearing
with  the  right  to  cross-examine  hostile  witnesses.   The   Dodd-
Keating  bill  permits  the  use  of  confidential  information.  The
House  bill  requires  an  annual  declaration  by  the   President,
"stating  specifically  and   in  detail  the  reasons",  for   shutting
off  any  area  like  Communist  China  from  travel.   The  Dodd-
Keating  bill  puts  this  power  in  the  hands  of  the  Secretary of
State,   imposes   no   time  limit  and   requires   no   statement  of
reasons.
In  addition  the  Dodd-Keating  bill  is  an  omnibus   measure,
a  grab-bag  of  pet  reactionary projects.   It  would  among  other
things  amend  the  Smith  Act  to  expand  the  crime of  "organiz-
ing"  and  the  Foreign  Agents  Registration  Act  to  change  the
meaning  of  the  term  "foreign  principal."   The  purpose  of  this
is explained in  the  Senate report  (No.  1811,  p.  3)  which  says,
"The   Department  of  Justice  has  informed  the  Congress   that
experience  in  the  administration  of  the  Foreign  Agents  Regis-
tration  Act  shows  a  need   for   the  inclusion  within  the   term
"foreign   principal'   of   domestic   organizations   which,   while
perhaps  not  subsidized  by  a  foreign  government  or   political
party,  are  substantially  controlled,   directed   or  financed  by  a
foreign  government  or  foreign  political  party.   Proof  of   such
control,  direction, or  financing  often   is  available  where  proof
of   'subsidy'   is  difficult   or  impossible."
Proof  by Parallelism
This  would  open  the  door  to  proving  that  a  domestic  or-
ganization  was  foreign  "directed"  by  showing  that  its  policies
"paralleled"  those  of  a  foreign  government  or  political  party.
Organizations  so  held  would  be  required  for  mailing  purposes
to   label  their  material  "foreign   political  propaganda"   and
themselves  as  a  "foreign   agent."    This   would   destroy  them
overnight.   Dodd's  recent  attacks  on  the  National   Committee
for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy  indicate the  use  he  might  make  of
such  a  provision  if  he  could  get  away  with  it.   This  "sleeper"
in   the   Dodd-Keating   bill   has   so   far    escaped    newspaper
attention.
In  this  connection  it  would  be  well  to  consider  the  way  the
Republicans,  led  by  Wiley,  counter-attacked Fulbright  on  July
1  for  his  criticisms  of  Mr.  Eisenhower  in  the  U-2  affair.   This
counter-attack   was  orchestrated  from   the  White   House   and
bore  the  stamp  of  Hagerty's  tactics, which  is to  apply  the  Red
smear.   For  a  Senator  to  say  of  another,  as  Wiley  did  of   Ful-
bright,  that  "the  biggest  noise  and  greatest  effort  to  pin  blame
on  U.S.  policy  appears  to  be  coming—second  only  to  Moscow
—from   the  Chairman,  of  the  Senate  Foreign   Relations   Com-
mittee"  recalled  McCarthy's  tactics.  This  is  no  time  for  legis-
lation  which  would   put   new  weapons   in  the  hands  of   the
unscrupulous  and  the  paranoid.
Editing  Mr.  K's  Nazi  Death  Camp  Speech  to  Spare  Adenauer's  Feelings
A  visit  to  a Nazi concentration camp is  calculated  to  make
anyone  apprehensive about  a  revival  of  Nazism.   In  this  re-
spect  Premier  Khrushchev's  speech  at  the  Matthausen  camp
in  Austria,  where  122,167  persons  were  exterminated,  was
hardly  surprising.   But  the  New  York  Times  cabled  account
July  4  showed  signs  of  hasty  editing  in  the  office  to  spare
Dr.   Adenauer's  feelings.    Although  Mr.   Khrushchev   used
the  visit  to  warn  against  the  dangers  of  a  Fascist  revival  in
Germany,  the  New  York  Times  put  an  editorialized lead  on
its  cable,  saying  that  he  had  used  his  visit  "to  emphasize
the   determination  of   the   Soviet   Union   to   have   its   way
ultimately  in  Germany."
The  New  York  Times  omitted the  appeal  that  the  Soviet
Premier  made  for  peace.   "A  new  world  war,"  he  said   (As-
sociated   Press   dispatch,   Philadelphia    Inquirer,   July   4),
"must  never  be  permitted  to  happen.   We  have  a  common
cause   in  the  fight  against  the  rebirth  of   Fascism   and  the
fight   for   the   preservation  of   peace   on  our   planet."    The
New  York  Times  own  account  said  Mr. Khrushchov  "seemed
moved  almost  to  tears  by  his  visit  to  the  infamous camp."
The  Inquirer  account  added that  among  the  wreaths left  by
Mr.  Khrushchov was  one  for  a  Soviet   Lt.  Gen.  Karnichev.
"On  a  freezing  winter  night  during  the  war,"  the  AP  re-
ported,  "the  Nazis  sloshed  buckets  of  cold  water  on Karni-
chev  until  he  froze  into  a  solid  block  of  ice."
The  Soviet  Premier,  said  the  AP  story,  "denounced  Aden-
auer  for  saying,  'God  has  chosen  the  German people  to  save
Europe   from   Communism.'    Such   a   remark   Khrushchov
suggested   sounds  like  several  statements  by  madman  Hit-
ler,  who  tried  to  create  a  'new  order  in  Europe'  of  which
this  death  camp  is  the  symbol."  The  New  York  Times  in-
serted  in  its   account  an  explanation  of  this  revealing  re-
mark  Adenauer  made  last   January  22  to  the   Pope.    "Dr.
Adenauer  said  later,"  the  New  York  Times  explained,   '"he
did  not  mean  West  Germany  was  a  force  against  the  East
but,  geographically  speaking,  had  the  duty  of  facing  Eaist.".
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  11, 1960
AEC  Seems  to  Act  Like  A  World  Cartel  to  Maintain  Prices  of  the  Destructive  Stuff
A  Glimpse  of the  Uranium  Business  and  Our  H-Bomb  Stockpile
No  attention  has  been  paid  by  the  press  to  a  report  recently
released   by  the   General   Accounting  Office   on   the  contracts
between  the  AEC  and  Anaconda  Copper   for  the  purchase  of
uranium   concentrates.    Anaconda   is  our   largest   single   pro-
ducer,  and  the  report   shows  the  easy-going  methods  used  by
the  AEC  in  negotiating  with  it.
The  GAO   report   says  a  revised   contract   for   deliveries   to
the  end  of  1966  was  tentatively entered  into  without  evaluat-
ing  Anaconda's  cost  data.   When  the  GAO   investigated and
informed  the  AEC  that  Anaconda  earnings  per  ton  were  run-
ning  in  excess  of  those  estimated,  a  new  price  was  negotiated
which  will  save  the  government  about  $6,000,000.
Basic Profit  Estimate  Still  A  Mystery
The  report  also  discloses  (1)  that  the  GAO  has  been  un-
able  to  find  out  how  the  AEC  arrived  at  its  basic estimate that
earnings  of  $4   a  ton   were  reasonable   in  uranium  contracts,
(2)    that   these  contracts  represent  a  risk-free   operation,  the
price  even  including an  allowance per  pound  for amortization
of  facilities,  (3)   that  the  AEC pioneered  both  the  exploration
for  new  ore  and  development  of  the  most  efficient   means  for
processing   it.   Private  enterprise  took   over   on   a  featherbed
basis.   Prices  have  fallen  from  $15  a  pound   in  1951   to  $8  in
this  new  contract  but  still  lag  behind  the  fall  in  costs  due  to
improved   techniques.
A  reduction   in  the  price  of  uranium  would  cut  the  cost  of
atomic  power  but  an  item  in  Nucleonics  Week   (June  30)   in-
dicates  that  the  AEC  seems  to  be  more  interested  in  maintain-
ing  prices.   This  authoritative   McGraw   Hill   publication  for
nuclear  developments   reported:
Cheaper  Uranium  Rejected
"The    U.S.   has   recently  rejected   a   Belgian   offer   to   sell
uranium   concentrate—some   2,000,000   pounds—at   'half   the
price'  the  U.S.   is  paying  for  Canadian  concentrates.    [About
$8.75  a  pound  as  against  $8  per  pound  U.S.—IPS.]   Belgian
government  officials  said  the  offer  had  been  made  '4-5'  times
in  the  past  two  years.  Belgium  has  since  sold  200,000  Ibs.  of
the  U308  uranium  concentrate  to  India."
According  to Nucleonics,  the  U.S.  turned  down  the  Belgium
offer   on  the  ground  that  "oversupply  in  the  domestic  U  in-
dustry  made  it  impossible  for  the  U.S.  to  accept   the   offer."
When  India  agreed  to  take  200,000  pounds  "the   U.S.  stepped
in  to  ask  that  the  sale  be  postponed   until  it  could  be  carried
out  under  proposed   fuel  material  safeguards  of  the  Interna-
tional   Atomic   Energy   Agency."    The   Belgians  and   Indians
refused  to  delay the  sale on  the  ground  that  the  safeguards  had
not  yet  been  adopted.   This  sounds  like  the  tactics  of  a  cartel,
anxious  to  hold  up  the  world  price.
' The  Super-Bomb  A  Bonanza
Should  agreement   be  reached  to  end  nuclear  weapons   pro-
duction,  the  bottom  would  fall  out  of  the  uranium   market.
The  development  of  the  "super-bomb",   which  uses  large  quan-  .
tities  of  uranium, has  been  a  bonanza  for  the  industry.   Pur-
chase  of  uranium  concentrates  rose  from   2,900  tons  in  fiscal
1953  to  33,326  tons  in  fiscal  1959.    The  AEC's   procurement
of   raw  materials,  the  production   from  them  of   nuclear   ma-
terials,  and  the  development  and  fabrication   of  weapons  from
these   materials   has   tripled   during   the   same   period—from
$657,000,000  in  fiscal  1953  to  $1,905,000,000  in  fiscal  1959-
There  are   reasons  to   believe   that   our   stockpile   of   super
bombs  has  risen  beyond  any  conceivable military use  but  there
seems  to  be  no  way  to  shut  off  production.    At  the   Annual
Conference  of  the  American  Association  for  the  United   Na-
tions  March  6-7,  Leo  Goodman,   atomic  energy  adviser  of  the
United  Auto  Workers,  estimated  that  the  AEC  "has  now  pro-
duced  a  minimum of  6,250  H  bombs  with  an  explosive   force
of  96,000  megatons  or  45  million  times  the  force  that  it  took
to  destroy  Hiroshima."  Dr.  David  Inglis,  the  Argonne  labora-
tory   physicist,   who   was  present,   commented,   "I   think  you
are  30  percent   low."
"Pre-Emptive  War"  Doctrines  Seen  Heightening  Danger  of  Accidental  War
A   new   area   in   which   fruitful   international  negotiation
may   be  possible   is   in  that  of   preventing  accidental  war.
This  is  suggested   in  a  study  of  accidental  war  made  public
(but  given  little  attention)   July  4 by  a  group  at  Ohio  State
University  directed  by  John  B.  Phelps.   The   nine   scholars
who  participated came  to  the  conclusion  that  "there  is   a
significant  chance that  a  major  accidental  war  may  occur  at
some  time  in  the  1960's"  and  believe  "a  variety  of  small  but
collectively   very   significant  safeguards   against  accidental
war  might  be  more  susceptible  of  negotiation at  this time
than,  say,   a  nuclear  test   ban."
They  suggest  a  special   study  "of  the  possibility   of  pro-
viding   very   fast   and  reliable  communication  between  top
national  leaders  on  each  side  to  help  head  off  any  crisis  be-
fore   it  leads   to  disaster."   They   discfose   that  during   the
Suez  crisis  in  1956  intelligence  reports of  Soviet  troop  move-
ments  and  unusual  air  activity  over  Turkey  led  the   Presi-
dent  to  rush  back  from  Gettysburg  for  a  meeting  with  top
security  advisers.   "Fortunately   it  was   soon   learned,"  the
Ohio  State  study  says,   "that   the   Soviet   movements   were
not  direct  threats  in  the  Middle Eastern  situation,  and  U.S.
forces   were  only  partially  alerted.   But  if  the  unusual  ac-
tivity  had  not  been  identified and  U.S.  forces  had  been  fully
alerted,   a   Russian    alert    would   probably   have    followed,
further  increasing  the  danger  of  the  situation."
Just   such  situations  illustrate  the  danger   of  "pre-emp-
tive"  war  doctrines.   As   the  Ohio  State   study   says,   "The
danger  at  this  point  is  enormously heightened  by  any  pres-
sure  to  launch  a  pre-emptive  attack."  The  Ohio  study  con-
cludes  that  one way  to  avoid  accidental war  is  "to stress  ex-
clusively,  in  word  and  deed,  a  second  strike  capability"  i.e.
that  the  U.S.   will  never  strike   first.   The  idea  of   striking
first,  however,  is  being  propagated  in  official  circles  by  the
military  and such  Rand  (Air  Force)  Corporation thinkers  as
Herman  Kahn.   The  Ohio  study  concludes  from  a  study  of
past  accidents  that  they  tend  to  provoke war when  both  sides
are   poised  and  ready  "or  when  either  side  needs  only  an
excuse  for  war."
The  Ohio  Study  Group  sent  letters  of  inquiry  to  members
of   the  Congressional  committees   on  foreign  relations  and
armed  services,  those  who  served  on  the  Gaither  panel  and
the  panel  for  the  Rockefeller  Brothers  military report,  and
a  small  number  of  other  selected   persons.    "Of  those   who
did  rank  the  accidents   in  order  of  seriousness,"  the  report
says,  "the  majority  ranked  the  spread  of  limited  war  as  the
most  serious  danger."   The  report  also  concludes  that   "the
diffusion   of   nuclear   power"   will   increase   the   chances   of
accidental   war.
1   0   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  11, 1960
No  One Questioned The Wisdom of The Oil Company  Showdown with Castro
(Coin/lined   from    Puge  One)
Paul  Sweezy  and   Leo  Huberman   brought   back   and   will  ex-
pound   in  a  forthcoming   issue  of   their  Monthly   Review.    It
may  also  be  found  in  the  warmly appreciative portrait  Simone
de  Beauvoir  painted  of  Fidel  in  the  April  7  issue  of   France-
Obseri'atettr.    Even   in   that   pillar   of   anti-Communism,   The
Neic  Leader,  one  finds  a  picture  of  Castro's   Cuba   quite  dif-
ferent  from  the  vapid  nonsense  in   Congress.
Anti  Communists Friendly  to  Castro
I  would   call  attention  to  three   recent  articles  in  The   Neti
1
Leader—by  Harry  Schwartz   (March  14), by  Robert  J.  Alex-
ander    (March   21)   and   by  Theodore   Draper   (July   4-11").
Mr.   Schwartz,   the   Soviet   expert   of   The   Netr   York   Times.
pleaded   for   the  U.S. to  "break   out   of   its  present   bonds   of
resentments   and   legalistic  fetishes   and   try   to   formulate   an
imaginative  policy"  which  would  include  the  fixing  of   sugar
quotas   by  bilateral   negotiation,  as  the   Cubans  have  long  de-
manded.    Prof.   Alexander,  a  leading  anti-Communist  expert
on   Latin  America  also  argued   against  a   policy  of   economic
reprisals,   and   defended   the   Cuban   oil   deal   with  Mikoyan.
"Newspapers  which  state  that  Cubans  have  fallen   into  a  trap
in   this  agreement,"   Prof.   Alexander  wrote,  "are mistaken."
He  said  that  the  U.S.  has  been  buying  3  million  tons  of  sugar
a  year  from  Cuba,  leaving  it  with  2  and   a -half  billion  tons  to
be  peddled   elsewhere.   The   Russian  agreement  to  take  a mil-
lion  tons  a  year  for  the  next five  years will  therefore,  he  wrote,
give  the   Cubans   "assured   markets  for  almost   80   percent  of
their  output,  instead  of  the  previous 60  percent."   Prof.  Alex-
ander  said  "Castro  and  his  rebels  have  caught  the imagination
of  the  humble  people  who,  in  many countries,  wish  they  could
destroy  their  own  military  cliques  as  Castro  destroyed  Cuba's"
and  initiate  "similar  land  reforms."    Mr.  Draper,  an authority
on  the  history  of  the  Communist  movement,  reported  that  the
Castro  group  and   the   Communists   "have   fallen   out   in   the
past  and   it  cannot  be'ruled  out  that  they  may  fall  out   again
in  the  future."    He  said  the  revolution  "cannot   be  dismissed
merely  as  a  diabolical  aberration  because   it  does  not   live  up
to  our  expectations"  and  depicted  it  as  "a  new  type  of  system
that  is  neither  capitalist nor  socialist,  but  contains  elements  of
The  Peasant  Before  and After  Castro
"For  less  than  50  cents  a  week—provided  you  are  a
bona  fide  Cuban  proletarian or  peasant—you  can   now
lead  the  revolutionary  high  life  in  the  lounges  and  card
parlors   of   the   one-time  sanctum   of   Havana's   upper
crust,  the  Havana Biltmore  Yacht  and  Country Club....
"Incredible  enough  in  an  island  as  narrow  as   Cuba,
many   of   the  campesinos   [peasants]   who   today    enjoy
the  ocean  had  never  seen  it  before  the  Revolution. .  .  .
Families   felt   cut   off   from  civilization.    A   man   might
have   to  go   three  miles  for  water   (from   a  neighbor's
well),  40  miles  for  a  doctor  and  10  miles  to  bury   the
dead.   He  had  no  radio  and  no  daily  newspapers.   There
were   no   schools   and   no  church,   and   the   priest   came
through  just  once  a  year,  to  baptize  infants  at   $3 per.
.  .  .  The  government  did  nothing  but  harass   you  with
soldiers,   rural   guards   and   taxes.    Soldiers   and   police
everywhere,  which  no  one  needed,  and  not  a  teacher   to
be  found."
—Thomas  Wolfe,    in.  flic  'Washington  I'ost,  July   ;?,  the
one   sympathetic    installment   of   a   seven   part   series
otherwise  treating  Castro  as  a  tool  of  the  Communists.
both,   and   emerges   where   capitalism   has   not   succeeded   and
socialism  cannot  succeed.
Congressional   discussion  took   for   granted   that   the   event
which  precipitated  its  panicky  action  on   sugar   was   justified.
No   one  questioned   the   refusal   of  U.S.   and   British  oil   com-
panies  to  refine  Soviet  crude  oil  which  Cuba  is  getting  at  80
cents  a  barrel  cheaper  than  Venezuelan  crude.   The   oil   com-
panies  in  Cuba   are  subject  to  its  laws.   It  is  hard   to  see  any
legal  ground   for   this   refusal.   Cuba   consumes   about   3    1/2
million   tons  of   petroleum   a  year,  and   each  of   the  three   oil
companies  there  has  a  capacity  of  about   4   1/2   million  tons
annually.    Each  was  asked   to   refine   300,000  tons  of   Russian
oil   a  year,  or   about   one-quarter  of   the   island's   requirements
(London   Economist,   July   2).     This   would    still   leave   the
companies   with   the   refining  and   distribution   business,    the
major  share  of  the  crude,  and  goodwill  for  a  future  in  which
rising  living  standards  will   surely  increase   Cuban   consump-
tion   of  oil.  In  arrogantly   preferring   to   provoke  their   own
expropriation,  they  have  created  a  situation  for  which  the  rest
of  us will  pay.                                                        Noon.  July  6
If   You  Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Long  Envelope,   We'll  Send  A  Free  Copy   of  This   Week's   to  A  Friend
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew
Street   ............
City  .  ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)    Name  ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
(or  enter)  my  sub
.........................Zone.
for  $2  (6  mos.)   or
for  the  enclosed  $5:*
""'""f/ii'TiYo
$4  (1  yr.) additional:
gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
5618   Nebrosko  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class   Matter   at  Washington.  D.   C.,  under  tile  Act  of  March   3,   187!l.    Post-dated  Mondays   lt>ut  pub-
lished  every  Thursday except  the  last   two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   JifilS  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington  in,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published  and   edited   by   J.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$r>   In  tin-  r.  S.:  $(i  In  Canada;  ?10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $1.1  to  Kurope;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia   arid  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED