I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960mar28.pdf

============================================================

Appeal  to Ike  on  Castro, P.  3
British  Press,  Right  to  Left,  Unlike  Ours,  Welcomes  Nuclear  Test  Compromise at  Geneva.   Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  12MARCH  28,  1960
I
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
16  CENTS
The   New   Russian   Offer   and   the  Enemies  of  Peace
The  enemies  of  peace  are  in  full  cry  here  on  the  heels  of
the  Russian nuclear  test  moratorium offer  at  Geneva.   All  the
main   organs   of   government   concerned,   the   Pentagon,   the
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  and   the   State  Department   are
engaged  in  poisoning  the  public  mind  on  the  subject  through
what  might  justly  be  called  their  wminformation   offices.     To
watch  what  is happening  is to  feel  oneself  living  among mad-
men,   determined to  thwart  every  opportunity which  may draw
mankind  back from the abyss.
Though   public  official   statements  wait  for   a   decision  by
the  President,  the  private  briefings  which  fuel  the  press  began
to  generate suspicion and  derision  (see  adjoining box)  within
a  few hours of  the  announcement in  Geneva.  The  No.  1 mis-
representation  is  that  tests  underground  of  a  weapon  smaller
than  the  Hirshima-type  bomb  cannot  be  detected,  and  that  a
moratorium   on   these   smaller   tests   would   depend   only  on
"word   of  honor."    The  AP  from  Geneva  March   20  quoted
unnamed  "Western  scientists"  as  saying  that  shots  below  this
20  kiloton  threshold  are"  incapable  of  detection  with   present
scientific   techniques"   and   Dana   Adams   Schmidt   reported
from   Washington   in  the  New   York   Times   March   21  that
tests  below  that  size  "cannot  be  detected  if  carried  out  under-
ground."
As Far As  Antarctica
It  is true that  one cannot  be certain of  detecting  the smallest
shots  and  that  it  may  be  more  difficult   to  distinguish  them
from   earthquakes.    But  they  can  and   often   are  detected  at
great  distances.    An  authoritative  article   in   the   Journal    oj
Geophysical  Research  last  October  on  the  so-called  Hardtack
series  of  underground  tests  reports  that  they  were  recorded  in
this  country by temporary  seismograph  stations  up  to  distances
of  nearly  2400  miles  "and   records  from   all  over  the  world
were  available  from  regular  seismograph  stations."   The  tran-
script  of  the  technical  conference  at  Geneva  last  winter shows
that  the  Air  Force  seismologist  Carl  Romney  brought  in  rec-
ords  on  the  Hardtack  series  from  more  than  90  stations,  in-
cluding  Sweden  and  Japan.   The  largest  of  these  shots, Blanca,
was   19  kilotons,   but   the   second   largest  Logan  was  only  5
kilotons,  and  the  third  in  size,  Tamalpais,  was  only  72  tons
(i.e.   .072  kiloton).   The  transcript  of  the  Geneva  technical
discussions  shows  that  seismic  records  of  both  the  19  kiloton
and  the  5 kiloton  shots  were  obtained  in  the  Soviet  Union  at
the  Tiksi  station  in  the  epicentral  distance of  6,890  kilometers
(about  4300  miles  away)  and  that  the  19  kiloton   shot  was
registered  as  far   away  as  the   Soviet  seismic  station   in  Ant-
arctica  at  the  epicentral  distance  of  16,250  kilometers or  more
than  10,000 miles.*
The"  grid   system  to  be  established   in  accordance  with  the
decisions  reached  at  the  1958  Geneva  conference  would  place
4
Slow  Careful  Study
"Washington,  March  10—The  State  Dept.  said  today
that  the  Soviet  Union's  conditional  acceptance  of  Presi-
dent  Elsenhower's  proposal  for  a  limited  nuclear  test
ban  would  be  studied  'very  carefully'.  .  .  .  Privately,
however,   officials   expressed  the  view  that  the  Soviet
offer  had  the  earmarks  of  what  has  come  to  be  known
here  as  'the  Saturday  special*—a  seemingly  large  con-
cession  designed  to  catch  the  Sunday  headlines."
—E.  W,  Kenworthy,  writing  at  the  State  Dept.   Sat.
afternoon   March  19,  a  few  hours  after   the  Soviet      offer
was  made  public  in  Geneva, New  York  Times,  Mar.  20.
"The  more  experts  here  study  the  new  Soviet  propo-
sal  the  more  skeptical  they  seem  to  become  about  it."
—John  M.  Hightower,  Associated  Press,  writing   at
the  State  Dept.  Sunday  afternoon  Mar.  20.
"Among     Administration    disarmament    specialists
there  was  little  optimism  that  the  Soviet  proposal  rep-
resented  an  important break  in  the  stalemate  that  has
descended  upon  the  17-month old  test-ban  conference."
—John   W.  Finney,  writing  in  Washington    Monday
afternoon,  Mar.  21, New  York  Times,  Mar.  22.
control  posts   across  the  Soviet  Union   at  still   undetermined
but   much  smaller  distances  than   these.   These  posts   would
detect  many of  the  smaller  shots.   (It  will  be  recalled  that  the
1.7  kiloton   Rainier  shot   was  detected   2400   miles  away  in
Alaska.)     Any  attempt  to  violate   the  moratorium  on  shots
below  20  kilotons  would  be  risky.    As  Humphrey  said  in  a
speech  prepared  for  delivery  to  the  Senate  Wednesday   after-
noon   "the   United  States  would  have  at  least  three  ways 'in
which  a small  test  conducted  secretly might  be discovered,  (1)
the  control  posts  being  established  in  the  Soviet  Union  would
detect  many  signals  even  in  the  low  range;   (2)   the  United
States  would  still  have  available  to  it  its  highly  sensitive  na-
tional  stations  and  stations  in  other  countries   which  furnish
data  on  earthquakes  and  possible  nuclear  explosions;  and   (3)
our  regular  intelligence  sources  would  furnish  information  on
whether   suspicious  activity  was  going   on   in  certain   areas."
Additional  Safeguard  Available
There  is an  additional  safeguard  available.   Although  Sena-
tor  Humphrey  said  "on-site  inspection  would  not  be  allowed
during  the  moratorium  below  the  threshold",  there  is  no  rea-
son  why  the  quota  of  veto-free  inspections  should  not  include
{Continued  on  Page   Two)
"A  report  in  the  Carnegie  Institution  Annual  for  '55-'56  on
experiments  in  Alaska in  1955  with  non-nuclear  underground
shots  showed  that  explosions  as  small  as  one  ton  (one-thou-
sandth  of  a  kiloton)  could  be  detected  within  400  kilometers
of  250 miles.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  28, 1960
Anderson  and  Holifield  Rush  Into  Print  to  Help  Block  A  Testing  Agreement
The Veto Free Inspection Quota Could Also Be Used on Suspect Smaller Shots
(Continued   -from   Page   One)
shots  below  as  well  as  above  the  threshold   during  the  mora-
torium  period.    Indeed,   with  the  actual  text  of  the  Russian
offer  still  kept  secret  here  as we  go  to  press,  there  seems  to  be
some  confusion  on  this  vital  point.    My  curiosity  was  piqued
by  an  Associated  Press  dispatch  from  Geneva  in  the  Baltimore
Sun  March  21  which  reported,  "The   Russians  said  they  even
would   accept   some  form  of  control  over  these   small  under-
ground  tests,  but  did  not  define the  inspection  machinery  they
had  in  mind."    In  one  informed  quarter,  where  a  summary of
the  Russian  offer  was  available,  I  was  told  it  would  allow  use
of  the  inspection  quota  below  as  well  as  above  the  threshold.
I  have  since  verified  this  at  the  State  Department.
Humphrey  Suggested  This First
Except  for  Senator  Humphrey's,  no  voice  here  is  raised  for
negotiation.    The   Russian   offer,   to  accept  the  Geneva  grid
system  but with  a  moratorium  on  the  smaller  shots  while  joint
work  is  pursued   to  improve   detection   methods,  is  the   same
compromise   suggested   by  Humphrey   last   Fall   and   by   the
British  at  Geneva   a  few  weeks  ago.   The   case  for  this  com-
promise  is  so  clear  that  only  in  a  capital   as  wacky  as  ours
would   it  be  questioned.     Let  us  spell   it  out   simply.     1.  It
would  take  two  to
%
 three  years  to  set  up  the  Geneva  grid  sys-
tem  anyway.   2. The  Berkner  panel  report  to the White  House
last  spring  outlined  a  program   of   research  which  would   in
three  years  time  improve  the  grid  system  to  the  point  where  it
could   identify  90  percent  of   "unidentified   events"  down   to
the  5  kiloton  range.    3.  So  by  the  time  the  grid  system  is  in-
stalled,  the  means  for  improving  it  will  be  at  hand.   Why  not
then  agree  on  the  grid   system  and  pursue  its  improvement
jointly ?   Why  let  the  precious  opportunity  pass ?
'  Opposition  comes  now  simply  from  those  who  want testing
and  the  arms  race  to  go  on.   They  make  up  a  formidable  com-
pany  which  can  be  defeated  only  by  an  upsurge   of   public
feeling.   The  fierceness  of  the  opposition   is  a  barometer  of
how  close  we  are  to  a  reasonable  compromise  at  Geneva.   The
enemies  of  peace  are  already  digging  in  to  defeat  any  treaty
in  the  Senate.   The  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  will
be  the  first  hurdle,  and  its  18  members  now  stand  as  firmly
Even  Snail's Pace  Disarmament
Looks  Like   Break-Neck
Speed  to Pentagon
"U.  S.  disarmament  policy  is  increasingly  stressing
serious  proposals  instead  of  propaganda.   Behind  this
stress  is  the  fear  that  a  free-wheeling  attractive  p'ro-
posal   designed    primarily    for   its    propaganda    value
might  be  accepted  by  the  Russians.  .  .  .
"The  West  is  cautiously  offering  a  phased  and   bal-
anced   approach  with  constant  stress  on  the  need   for
careful  inspection  and  control.   No  time  span  is   men-
tioned   because   any   realistic   one   would   be   too   dis-
couraging  [the  millennium?—IPS]. ...
"Because  the  U.  S.  is  seriously  interested  in  disarma-
ment,  officials  say,   it  cannot  accept  the  sweeping  4-year
panacea  the Soviet  Union is  offering.  . . .  Once the  West
embarks  on  the   first  stages  of   an  arms-control   pro-
gram,  executives  would   be  hard  put  to  slow  the  slide
in  defense  expenditures  to  a  safe  pace.
"And  once  the  spending  reaches  a  low  level,  it  would
be  difficult   to  rearm  swiftly."
—Washington  Star, March  21, "U. S.  Shifting   Stress
in Disarmament Plan."
as  tin  soldiers  behind  the  AEC.   Anderson  and  Holifield,  the
senior   Democrats,   dashed   into   print   in   opposition    to   the
Geneva  compromise  with  as  little  evidence  of  sober  considera-
tion  as  their  youngest  and   most  frenetic  colleague,   Hosmer
(R.)   of   California.    The   Committee   allowed   McCone   and
Teller  to  use  a  neatly   stage-managed   hearing   on   "peaceful
uses"  last  Tuesday  as  a  sounding  board  against  an  agreement.
By  some  accident  of  casting,  an  independent  character  got
into  the  act.    Henry  D.  Smyth  of  Princeton  was  one  of  the
original  and  most  renowned  members of  the  AEC  in  the  days
before  it  became  a  home  for  retired  big  business  men.   Dr.
Smyth    warned    the   Joint    Committee    (while    Dr.    Teller
wriggled   angrily  in  a  seat  behind  him)   to  make  "very  sure
that  our  peaceful  uses  of  atomic  explosions will  not  become  a
disruptive  force  in  our   international   relations."   This   is,  of
course,  what  McCone  and  Teller  hope  to  make  them.  What  a
pity  there  is  no  longer  any  such  voice  in  opposition   on   the
AEC!    Or  on  the  Joint  Committee.
British  Press,  Right  to  Left,   Unlike
"The  DAILY  HERALD   (Labor)  says  that  Mr. Khushchov
has  broken  the  deadlock.  . . . The hope  for  peace  must  not be
shattered  by  the  military  planners  of  the  U.  S.  .  .  .  In  the
same   vein,   the   NEWS   CHRONICLE   (Liberal)   writes:
'Britain  is  prepared  to  accept  as  genuine  the  Soviet  desire
to  ban nuclear  tests;  so,  also,  presumably  is  the  President.
But  there  are  voices at  the  Pentagon  which  may  seek  to  dis-
suade  him.   American  defense  chiefs  are  perturbed  at  the
gap between  Soviet  and U.  S. missile development; but if  the
world   must   wait   until   Russia   and  America   regard   each
other  as  level  in  the  race  towards  destruction,  the  destruc-
tion itself  may come  first.'
"The  GUARDIAN  (Liberal)  says  the  Russians  have  at
last  made  a  valuable  concession  to  the  Western  position  on
.nuclear  tests.  If  the  U.  S.  and Britain  do not  accept  it,  they
will  look  hypocritical,  to  say  the  least.  .  .  .  One Conserva-
tive  newspaper,  the DAILY  EXPRESS,  agrees.  .  .  .  Under
the  heading,  This  Is  A  Time  for  Trust',  the  newspaper  says
that  the  peoples  of  the  West  expect  their'governments  to
Our  Own,  Cheers  New  Test  Proposal
respond  to  the  Russian  concession  in  full  measure.'
"THE  TIMES  comments  that  .  .  .  Russia's  willingness  to
separate  smaller  underground  tests  from  the  rest  may  have
catches  in  it,  but  it  definitely   ranks  as  progress.
"The     DAILY     MAIL     (Conservative)    says    that    the
[British]  Medical  Council's  latest  report  on  fallout   comes
as  a somberwarning  to  the  world.  The  report  says  that  the
amount  of  Strontium  90  in  the  bones  of  some  children  is
near  the  anxiety  level;  and  if  such  a  grim  document  does
not  jolt  Britain,  America  and  Russia  into  an  agreement  to
end  all  nuclear  tests  then  nothing  will."
—Today's  British  Papers,  Mar.  21-22, Brit.  Inf.   Service.
"This  provision   [for   a  moratorium  on  small  tests  while
their  monitoring  is  studied]  .  .  .  would  be  acceptable  to
Britain  but  not  so  palatable  to  the  U.  S.   If  the  latter  were
to  refuse  it,  however,  she  might  well find herself  practically
isolated  at  the  United  Nations  and lose  much  prestige  with
neutral  and  non-nuclear  countries."
—-Leader  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  (Conservative)  Mar.  21.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  28,1960
Cuba's  Agrarian  Reform  Called  More  Moderate   Than  Than  MacArthur's  in  Japan
Chile's  Students  Appeal  to  Ike  Not  to  Intervene  Against  Castro
(Abridged   From  Appeal  to  Ehenhower  in  Santiago)
"The   Cuban  revolution  is  being  observed  with  great  atten-
tion   and   even   with   immense  hope  by  all  progressive   Latin
American  sectors,  especially  the  University youth.
"We   know   and   applaud   your   recent   official   declaration,
serene  and  respectful,  with  regard   to  the  self-determination
of  the  Cuban  nation,  but  so  different,  unfortunately, from  the
campaign  of  hatred,  calumny  and  distortion  broadcast  by  the
two  great  North  American  news   agencies.
"The  anti-Cuban  campaign  has  revived  these  days  with  the
complicity   of   several   Latin  American   countries  waiting   for
the  Cuban  sugar  quota  in  the  North  American  market.   Latin
America  owes  its  historical  nullification  and  material  poverty
to  such  small  and  despicable  'statesmen.'
To Destroy Confidence in the  U. S.
"Your  Excellency:  In  our  modest  opinion, North  American
intervention  in  Cuba  would  be  'not  only  a  crime'—the  phrase
is  Talleyrand's—but  'an  immense  stupidity.'   It  would  be  an
unforgiveable  abuse  which  would   mortally  wound  the  moral
and  psychological  basis  of  the  Inter-American  System  and  the
collaboration   of  our   nations  with  yours.    You   would   have
the  interested  applause  of  the  small  circle  of  individuals who
encourage   you   to   intervene   because   this   is   convenient   for
their  own  self-interest,  but  you  would   lose  forever  the con-
fidence of  the  young,  the  poor  and  the  decent  people  of  Latin
America.
"At  the  same  time,  we  want  you  to  understand, that  we  do
not   give   unconditional   adhesion   to   the   Cuban   experiment.
We  are  also  discouraged  by  the  length  of  one  man's  term  in
office   and  the   lack  of  institutions  based   on   the  will  of   the
people.   But  it  seems  to  us  that  it  is  plainly  immoral  to  clas-
sify  the  Cuban  revolution,   its  government  or  its  social   fulfill-
ments,  especially  the  agricultural  reform,  as  'communist.'  This
[Cuban  agrarian]  reform  is more  moderate  and  generous  with
old  land  owners  than  that  carried  out  by  General  Mac Arthur
in  Japan  or  the  agrarian   reforms  supported   by  the  U.  S.  in
Egypt,  Israel,  India,  Pakistan,  Vietnam,  etc.
"Why  this  difference?   Is  it  because  seven  North American
Double  Standard  Cynically  Revealed
   :
"The   return  of   Ambassador   Bonsai   to   Cuba  .  .  .
would  negate  the  trip  by  President   Elsenhower ...
wipe  out  the  efforts  of  ...     myself  to  help  people  who
believe  in  democracy.   Thia  would be  ...      catastrophic.
.  . .  We should  not  appease  this  little  dictator  [Castro],
"When  the  sugar  act  was  last  before  the  Senate,  the
junior  Senator  from  New  Mexico  [Mr. Anderson]  and
I,  on  the  floor  of  the   Senate,  had  the  quotas  for   the
Dominican  Republic  and  Peru  reduced  .  . .in  order  to
make  liberal  provision  for  Cuba,  because  while  Cuba  at
that  time  had  a  dictatorship  [Batista],  the  argument
was—and  I  thought  it  a  worthy one—that  at  least  Cuba
was  cooperating  with  the  U.  S.   Some  persons  believe  it
is  very  bad if  the  person  who is  cooperating  is  not  able
to  pass  a sanitary  test."
—Smathers  (D.  Fla.),  U. S. Senate, March  18.
companies  on  the  island  own  two  million  hectares  of  land?
If  this  is  a  reason  for  the  U.  S.  to  attack  Cuba,  how  can any-
one   escape   the   dangerous   conclusion   that  North   American
private  investment  is  the  worst  threat  to  free  national   deci-
sions  and  social  progress ?
"Some   time  ago,  here  in  Santiago,  an  Ambassador  of   the
U.  S.  spoke  in  such  an  arrogant  way  of  'the  lesson  of  Guate-
mala'   that   the   Chilean   Senate   condemned    it  unanimously.
Now  others  apparently  prepare  'the  lesson  of  Cuba.'   Because
your  personal  and  official  position,  Excellency,  has  been  clear
and  different,  we  do  not  believe  that  we  are  lacking  respect  to
you  if  we  add  that  those  why  try  to  give  Latin  America  those
'lessons'  of  submitting  to  North   American  private   interests
are  digging  the  grave  of  the  Inter-American  System and,  per-
haps,  of  democracy  itself  in  this  part  of  the   Hemisphere.
"There  could  never  be  a  better  time  and  a  better  place  for
the  U.  S.,  if  it  so  desired,  to  demonstrate  to  the  world  that
which  humanity  can  expect  from  the  nation  of  Washington,
Lincoln  and  Roosevelt.
"Accept   our  respectful    homage,  for   the  Federation  of   the
Students    of    Chile."—Eduardo     Zuniga,    Secretary-General,
Patricio  Fernandez,  President.
How  Our  Pet  Latin  Dictator   (Smathers'  Friend)  Trujillo  Treats  Property  Rights
"It  began  with  a  housewife's   letter   to  the  editor   of   El
Caribe,   the   government-controlled   newspaper.    Butter   in
local   stores,   she   complained,   was   of   poor   quality.   Why
can't  the  government  do  something  about  it?
"In most  countries,  such  a  complaint would  go  all  but  un-
noticed.  But  not  in  the  Dominican  Republic.  For  alert  busi-
ness  men  here   [in   Ciudad  Trujillo]   it  had  a   frightening
significance:   The    Benefactor'—Dictator   Rafael   Leonidas
Trujillo—was  preparing  to  extend  his  vast  business  empire
into still  another    field....
"Soon  after  the  letter's  publication,  new  sanitary  regula-
tions  were  announced  to  cover  .  .  .  butter.   One of  the  few
firms  already  in  a  position  to  meet  them  was  La  Industria
Lechera—a  Trujillo  enterprise  which  enjoys  a  near  monop-
oly  in  milk  distribution  in  the  country's  two  major  cities.
No  one  was  surprised,  therefore,   when  the  company  last
month  introduced  'Petronilla's  butter.
"This   incident   highlights   one  of  the  many  devices   that
have  enabled  Trujillo  to  become  this  country's  most  power-
ful,  most  feared  and  wealthiest  businessman.  .  .  .  Govern-
ment  harassment   of  competitors  and  government  subsidies
to  Trujillo  enterprises  are  only  part  of  the  dictator's  busi-
ness  strategy.
"Today  there  is  hardly a  profitable  business  in  the  land  in
which  The  Benefactor   doesn't   have  an  interest,   direct  or
indirect.   He  controls  12  of  the  country's  16  sugar  mills,  ac-
counting  for  two-thirds of  the  total  production.  .  .  .  Glass-
making,   cement,   salt,    insurance,   textiles,    meat-packing
and  bag-making are  but  a  few  of  the  other  businesses  run
by  Trujillo  and his associates.. ..  Some  one-time  associates,
now exiled, estimate his  fortune  approaches  $600,000,000....
"Trujillo's  most  ambitious  business  undertaking  to   date
is  his  sugar  venture,  launched  in  1950. At  that  time  half  of •
the  country's  14  mills  were  American  owned.   This  created
some  problems  but  they  were   soon  solved.   A  barrage   of
propaganda   was   aimed  at   the   'monopolistic   international
corporations'  .  .  .  only  one  American  sugar  mill  remains  in
the Dominican Republic...."
—"Tycoon   Trujillo"   Watt  Street  Journal  on-the-seene  report   by  Staff    Member  JOB.  M.  Guilfoyle,   March  9. '
'    t,   3'            '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  28,  1960
That  Louisville,   Ky.,  Handyman  "Freed"  by  the  Supreme  Court  Is  Again  In  Jail
Race: War  Thunderclouds  Gather  But  Our  Political  Leadership  Drifts
A  growing  sense  of  solidarity  is  making  itself  felt   among
colored  men  everywhere.   The  terrible  scene  of  slaughter  out-
side  the  police station  in  Sharpeville,  South  Africa,  will  deepen
race  resentment  among  American  Negroes  just  as  the  spread-
ing  sit-down   strikes  in  our   South  will  inspire  the  resistance
in  Black  Africa.
There  is  a  difference  between  the  situation  here  and  there.
In   South   Africa,   the  Negro   is  resisting   the   effort   of   the
Afrikaan  white  majority  to  impose  new  disabilities  upon  him
in  the  shape  of  apartheid,  a  stricter  form  of  segregation   than
any  we  have  known.    Here  the   Southern  white  majority  is
fighting   a  rear-guard  action   against   a  massive  effort   by  the
Negro  to  end  segregation    altogether.
The  public  policy  of  the  Union  of  South  Africa  is  to  keep
the   Negro   permanently   in   subordinate   status.   The   public
policy  of   the  United   States   is  to   give   the  Negro   equality.
Unfortunately  the  theory  will  only  be  translated  into  practice
if  the  Negro  pushes  for  it.   He  is  pushing  for  it  at  last.
No Liberation Without Risk
The  push  has  its  dangers.   For  the  Negro,  the  alternative
is  acquiescence  in  humiliation;  no  people's  liberation  was  ever
yet  won  without  struggle.     For  the  sympathetic  white  man.
the  dangers   are  regrettable   but  seem  unavoidable  given   the
weak  character   of  our  political   leadership,   and  the    indiffer-
ence  of  the white  majority.
The  only branch  of  the  government  that  is facing  up  to  the
growing  crisis  with   resolution   and   responsibility  is  the  Su-
preme  Court.   It  took  two  actions  last  Monday  which  were,
by  normal  legal  standards,  quite  extraordinary.   It  agreed   to
hear  an  appeal   by  a  group   of  Negroes  against  an  Alabama
redistricting  law  designed  to  put  virtually all  registered  Negro
voters  outside  the  city  of  Tuskegee.    Hitherto  the  Court  has
always   refused   to  interfere  with  "gerrymandering"  laws.
The   other   action   to  which   we  refer   was  the   unanimous
opinion  by  Mr.  Justice  Black  reversing  tw'6  $10  police  court
fines  for   loitering   and   disorderly  conduct.    The   petitioner.
Sam  Thompson,  was  a  Louisville, Ky.,  Negro  handyman  who
committed  the  unforgiveable  crime  (in  the  South)   of  asking
That's All  We Want  'Em  to  Be
"Some   Negroes   and   a   few   whites  accused   Sheriff
Warren  Johnson  of  harassing  and  mistreating  Negroes.
.  . .  Mr. Johnson  attributed the  criticism to  politics.   He
said  there  was  no  difficulty  for  those  among  the  minor-
ity  race  'that  want to  be niggers,  and that's all  we want
'em  to be.'"
—"Negroes   in  [Slack  Belt  Say   Vote  Law   Won't   Aid
Them,"  story   by  Claude  Sitton,  N.  Y.  Times,  Mar.  18.
police  why  he  was  being   arrested  and  hiring  a  lawyer.
The  Supreme  Court  normally  would   never  think  of  hear-
ing  an  appeal  from  a  $10  fine  for  a  misdemeanor.   It   showed
itself  ready  again,  however,  to  brush  aside  conventional  legal-
ities  to  give  the  Negro  justice.    It  held  there  was  no  evidence
whatsoever  to  support  his  conviction  and   therefore  reversed
it  as  a  violation of  the  due  process  clause.
Police  lawlessness is  a  familiar  affliction   for  Negroes  every-
where,  North  or  South.   Sam  Thompson   in  his  vendetta  with
the  Louisville   police  promises  to  become  a  folk  hero.    Un-
fortunately  the  vendetta  has not  ended.   When  we  telephoned
Louisville after  the Court  decision,  we found  that  Mr.  Thomp-
son  had  been  arrested  no  less  than  12  times  since  the  convic-
tions  reversed  by the  Court  and  is even  now  serving a  6-month
sentence  for  four  misdemeanors.
It   remains   to   be   seen  whether,  even   with  white   friends
and  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union's  support,   a  Negro
can  ultimately defeat  a  police  force  determined   to  show  him
the  dangers of  "talking  back."
New Test of Un-American Committee
The  Court  last Monday  agreed  to  hear  the  appeal  of Arthur
M.  McPhaul  from  a  nine  months  jail  sentence  for  contempt
of  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Committee.   At  a  De-
troit  hearing  eight  years  ago  he  refused  to  produce  the  rec-
ords  of  the  Civil  Right  Congress.     His  petition  pleaded   that
the government  failed  to  prove  he  had  the  records  or  to  show
their  pertinency,  and   that  the  subpoena  was  so all-inclusive
as  to  constitute  unlawful  search  and  seizure.
Extrn   Copies   This   Issue   Available   (it  $3  A  Hundred  for  Wider  Distribution
I.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  5618  Nebraska  Ave.  N.-W.
Washington   15,  IX  C.
PleaM  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street   ..................................._.............._...................................
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
3/2S/W
Enter  gift  nub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City    ...............................,........Zone............State...................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Teg  O    No  Q
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5619   Nebraska   Av«.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
Chicago  Area  Readers:  IFS  will  speak  on  "The    Supreme  Court  and  the  Un-American  Activities  Committee"  at   Dinner  April  2,  Midland
Hotel,  Chicago,  in  Honor  of  the  70th  birthday  of  Famed  Civil  Libertarian  Lawyer,  Pearl  Hart.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED