I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960may09.pdf

============================================================

How   "Free  Asia"  Votes,  P.  3
New  York  Times  Comes  Out for  Abolition of  House  Un-American   Activities  Committee,  See  Page  2
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  18
MAY   9,  1960
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Moving  Closer  to  The  Doctrine  of  Preventive   War
Too  little attention has  been  paid  tu  a  disturbing  declaration
in   the   report   with   which   the   Commute.•   on   Appropriations
cleared  the  new  S4()  billion  defense  budget  lor  action  on  the
floor  of  the  Mouse.   In  it.  for  the  first  time,  so  far  as  I  know,
a  branch  ol   our  government   has  approsed   the   idea   ol   "pre-
empti\c  war".    The   House   had   just  begun   its consideration
of  the  bill  as  we  were  going  to  press,  and  we  hope  that either
there  or  in  the  Senate,  so  fateful   a  statement  of  policy  will  not
be allowed  to  stand  without  sober  discussion of  its  implications.
Until   now   it  has  been  the  declared  policy   of  our   govern-
ment  that  we  would  never  initiate  war.  at  least  not  a  nuclear
war.   Now   the  powerful   Appropriations  Committee,  in  a  re-
port  submitted  with   its  unanimous approval  by  the  respected
chairman  of  its defense subcommittee. Rep.  George  H.  Mahon.
D.,  of  Texas,  puts  forward  a  different  doctrine.    "In  the  final
analysis,"  the  report  released  April  29  says  (p.  8),   "to   effec-
tively   deter   a  would-be  aggressor,   we   should   maintain   our
armed  forces  in  such  a  way  and  with  such  an  understanding
that  should  it  ever  become  obvious  that  an  attack  upon  us  or
our   allies   is  imminent,  we  can  launch   an   attack   before   the
aggressor  has  hit  either  us  or  our  allies."
No Time for  Debate—Too  Late  for  Correction
This  is  not  the  full  blown  doctrine  of  preventive  war,  i.e.
of  initiating war  when  we  think  it  necessitated  by our national
interest.    It   is  "pre-emptive  war'',   i.e.  the   initiation   of   war
when,  in  the  words  of  the  House  committee,  it  "ever  became
obvious"   that  an  attack  was  coming  "upon  us  or  our  allies."
This  assumes a  faith  so  strong  in  military  intelligence  that  we
would   be  ready  to  commit  national  suicide  on   its  assurance
that  we  were  "obviously"  about   to  be  attacked.   The   signal
for   us  to  anticipate  and  attack  first  would   have  to  be  given
without  consulting  Congress;  there  would  be  no  time  for  de-
bate.   If  military  intelligence turned  out  to  be wrong,  it  would
be  too  late  for  correction.   A  readiness  for  "pre-emptive  war"
seems  to  us  a  sure  way  of  increasing  the  dangers   of  a  world
holocaust   by  miscalculation.     It   also  involves  another   ques-
tion,  dramatized  by  the  riots  which  yesterday  ousted   Rhee  in
Korea,  today  threaten  Menderes  in  Turkey  and  tomorrow  per-
haps  may  signal  trouble  for  Franco  in  Spain.   What  if  one  of
these  allied  dictators—to  save  himself—convinced  military  in-
telligence  that  the  riots  were  a  form  of  "internal  aggression"
to  be  followed  by  attack  from  the  Soviet  Union  or  one  of  its
satellites?    An  easy  acceptance  of  "pre-emptive war"  doctrine
invites  too  dangerous  a  readiness  to  push  buttons  and  pull
triggers.
"Pre-emptive  war"   is  bad  enough,  but  if  one  looks  at  the
hearings  the  Appropriations   Committee   has  been  holding  on
the  defense   budget,   one  begins   to   suspect  that  Mr.   Mahon
Dr.  Teller's  Real  Aims
"Not    disarmament,    hut    more    and   better    nuclear
weapons  in  the  hands  of   more  friendly  nations  should
be  the  immediate  goal  of  the  United  States,   physicist
Edward  Teller  said  last  night  at  Asilomar  [California].
"The  famed  scientist,  who  played  the  leading  role  in
the  development  of  the  hydrogen  bomb,  said  in  an  ad-
dress  at  the  National  Strategy  Seminar  that  he  thinks
any  disarmament  agreement  with  Russia  would  be  im-
possible  to  enforce  under  present  conditions.    'Further
development  of  nuclear weapons  is  desperately  needed,'
Teller  said.  .  .  .  He  said  stopping  nuclear  research  in
the  1
T
.S.  would  'betray  the  traditions  of  Western   civili-
zation.'  .  .  .  Teller  said  there  was  no  danger  of  people
being  harmed  by  fallout  from  nuclear  tests,  unless  the
amount  of  testing  is  greatly  increased.   He  called  talk
of   fallout  danger  'a  bugaboo.'  .  .  .
"Originally,  Teller  had  announced  that  his  (alk  would
he  'off   the  record',  but  it  was  announced just  before  he
spoke  that  he  had  changed  his  mind."
—Mdi'fi-.-i'n    I',  ii'.iixiiltt   t('al)   Herald  April   2<;.
and  his  colleagues are  ready  for  something  more.      Tn  Part  7
of  those hearings,  which  has  just  been  released,  one  finds  this
colloquy   between  Mr.   Mahon   and   Gen.  Thomas   S.   Power,
commander  of  the  Strategic  Air  Command.     It  is  at  page  73
under  the  heading,  "Preventive  War:"
Mr.  MAHON.    It  seems  to  me  that  as  (he  head  of  SAC
you  would  face  up  to  what  appears  to  me  to  be  the  facts  of
life—that  all  you  are  going  to  do  is  try  to  destroy  a  few
hundred  million or  more  of  his  people  and  his  industry  and
completely  paralyze  him; but  as  far  as  hitting  his   bases
generally,  there  are  just  too  many  of  them:  you  cannot  be
sure  of  hitting  them  and  he  can  use  them  to  hit  you.   You
cannot  afford  to  start  a  preventive war.
Gen.  POWER.    Let  me  address  myself   to  that  question.
I  am  not  advocating preventive  war.    The  mission  of   SAC
is  deterrence.  .  .  .  However,  I  think  you  can  only  deter  by
operating  from   a  platform  of  strength.     If  we   go  on  the
premise  of  trying  to  deter  a  war,  I  also  submit   that  you
will  not  deter  a  war  unless  you have  the  capability  to  start
a  war.
Mr. MAHON.   Right.
Gen.  POWER.   He  must  know  you  have  the  capability to
start  a war.
Mr.  MAHON.   Right; I agree.
Gen.  POWER.    If   he  thinks  you  cannot   strike   him,  he
will  take  this  world  over  piece  by  piece,  because  he  knows
you  will  not  initiate it.    You  will  end  up  by  standing  alone.
Mr.  MAHON.   I  suppose  you  agree,   probably  with  most
members  of  this committee, at least with  me, that  all  of  this
big  talk  in which we  engage  to  the  effect  that, no,  we  would
under  no  circumstances  more  or less  start  a  war,  we  ought
to  say  less  and  less  about  that  kind  of  matter  and  let  the
opponent  be  more  on   tenterhooks.
(Continued   on  Page   Four")
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  9, 1960
Why  Are  Congressmen  So  Pusillanimous  About  the  Un-American Committee?
Not  A  Single  Other  Calif. Liberal  Democrat  Supported  James  Roosevelt
We   urge  our   readers  in   California   to   organize  a   letter
writing  campaign  to  their  Congressmen.   It  was  shocking that
not  one  of  them  had  the  courage  to  stand  up  and  support,  or
indeed  to  stand  up  and  fight  back,  when  Congressman James
Roosevelt  struck  out  at  the  House  Committee  on  Un-Ameri-
can  Activities in  his  speech  calling  for  its  abolition  April  25,
though  the  main  portion  of  that  speech  dealt  with  the  Com-
mittee's  cowardly  hit-and-run  attack  last  year  on   California
teachers.   We   believe  the  other  29  Congressmen  from   Cali-
fornia  ought  to  be  forced  to  stand  up  and  be  counted,  espe-
cially  since  a  3-man  subcommittee  under  Willis  of  Louisiana
(with  Moulder  of  Missouri  and  Scherer  of  Ohio)  was  sched-
uled  to  open  new  hearings  in  San  Francisco  May  10  "regard-
ing  the  activities of  the  Communist  Party  of  Northern   Cali-
fornia."
He Spoke to An Almost Empty House
That  Mr.   Roosevelt  would   speak  on  the   Committee  was
known  in  advance to  the  rest  of  his  delegation.    He  spoke  to
an  almost  empty  chamber.    The  two  California  members  of
the  Un-American  Committee,  the  Republican  Donald   Jackson
and  the  Democrat  Clyde  Doyle,  failed  to  put  in  a  defense  of
their  activities.    On  the  other  hand,  none of  the  liberal  demo-
crats  showed  up  either.    We  think  such  Democrats  as  Chet
Holifield,  John  Shelley,  Jeff   Cohelan,   George   Kasem,  Clem
Miller,  Harold  Johnson, John  Moss,  George  Miller,  B. F.  Sisk,
John   McFall,   Harlan  F.  Hagan,  and  D.  S.  Saund  ought   to
put  themselves  on  record.   We  believe  the  House  Committee
ought  to  be  made  an  issue  in  every  California  district.
The  most  striking thing  about  the  Roosevelt  speech, which
we'  hope  readers  will  help   to  circulate   (copies   can  be  ob-
tained   by  writing  Congressman  Roosevelt),   is  the  disparity
between  the  amount  of  protest  in  the  State  itself  against  the
Committee's  activities  and   the  leaden  silence  in  the   State's
Congressional   delegation.     Not   only   many   of   the   State's
leading   newspapers  but   many  of   its   leading  organizations
publicly  opposed  the  Committee's  attack  on  California's   teach-
ers  and  forced  it  to  retreat.   Among  the  organizations  quoted
by  the  Congressman  in  his  speech  were  the  Department  of
New  York  Times For  Abolition
To  have  America's  leading  newspaper  join  in  the  cry
for  abolition  of  the  Un-American  Activities   Committee
is  an  event  of  first  importance.   On  April  30  the   New
York   Times   published   an   editorial   supporting   Rep.
James  Roosevelt's  "massive  attack  on  the  Committee"
and  calling  attention  to  the  decision  by  the  American
Civil  Liberties Union  at  its  biennial  conference  in  Chi-
cago  "for  a  'maximum  effort'  to  abolish  it."    Said  the
Times,  "Just  as  the  Senate  had  ultimately  to  take  re-
sponsibility  for  the  outrages  committed  in  its  name  by
the  late  Senator  McCarthy, so  the  House  is  responsible
for  the  actions  of  Representative Walter's   Un-American
Activities  Committee."
Other  newspapers  quoted  by  Rep.  Roosevelt   as  criti-
cal  of  the  Committee: the  Newark,  N.  J.,  Evening  News,
the   San  Francisco   Chronicle,   the   St.   Louis   Post-Dis-
patch,  the  Washington  Post,  the  San  Francisco   News-
Call  Bulletin,  and  the  Los  Angeles  Mirror^News.    The
New   York  Post  has  steadily   campaigned   against  the
Committee,   as   have   two   smaller   liberal   papers,   the
Madison,  Wis.,  Capitol-Times  and the  York, Pa., Gazette.
Social  Relations,  Episcopal   Diocese   of   California;   the   Cali-
fornia  State  Labor  Federation  AFL-CIO;  the  Southern  Cali-
fornia-Arizona   Conference   of   the   Methodist   Church;   the
Friends   Committee   on   Legislation   of   Southern   California;
the  Building Trades  Council  of  San  Francisco;  the  San  Fran-
cisco  Bay  Counties  District  Council   of   Carpenters;  and   the
national  convention  of  American  Federation  of   Teachers.
There  has  never  been  such  an  outpouring  of  protest  in  any
single  State and  it  was  the  first  time  the  Committee  has  been
forced  to  back  down,  first  postponing  and  then  cancelling  the
hearings  for  which  it  had  subpoenaed  110  teachers.   In  June
it   smeared   these  as  part  of   an   "extensive  and   malignant"
conspiracy,   but   its  annual  report   in  February  says   not   one
word  about  the  plot  in  California.    "For  all  we  know   from
the  report,"  Mr.  Roosevelt told  the  House,  "the  State  of  Cali-
fornia   is  a  veritable  Gibraltar  of   safety,   immune  from   the
dangers  the  committee  once  proclaimed  were  so  dire."    Yet
none  of  the  other  liberal  democrats  it  sent  to  Congree  have
had  the  courage  to  speak  up.
In  A  Passage   of  High  Satire,  Roosevelt  Attacks  Cruelty  of  the  Blacklist
"Not   only  does   it   [the   House  Committee]   assume   that
so-called   un-American   persons    are   incapable   of    decent
thoughts,  it  also  considers   them  unfit  for  gainful   employ-
ment.    Year  after  year  the  committee  has  ferreted  out  new
areas  of  our country  which  it  considers  vital  and from  which
it  wants to  abolish  such  persons.   This  year  it  is  the  Protes-
tant  clergy.    Last  year,  for  example,  one  of  these  areas  was
the  meatpacking    industry.
"Now,  personally,  I  am  willing  to  eat  meat  even   though
packed  by  political  heretics.    I  am  also  willing  to  eat  Rus-
sian  caviar.    But  the  committee  sees  farther   and  fears  for
our  safety.    What  if  there  were  a  war,  it  says?    Could  not
these  evil  persons  poison  or  hold  up  our  meat  supply?    My
friends,  I  suppose  they  could.   I suppose  they  could  put nails
in  our tires  too  if  they  worked  in  Akron  or  just  deprive  us
of  sleep  by cleaning  the  streets  too  noisily  at  night.    But  I
see  no logical  end to  this  kind  of  anxiety  except  to  say  that
such  heretics  cannot  be  permitted  gainful  employment,  and
then  I  suppose  we  should  put  them  to  death  to  avoid  watch-
ing  them  starve.
"Now  are  we  really  this  afraid?    Do  we  need  to  appoint
a  committee  to  drive  people  out  of   their   jobs.    Does  the
country  really  benefit   from  the  fact   that   John  Doe  came
before  the  committee and  told  it  that  Mary Jones' real  name
is   Mary  Jonovitch  and  she  is  or  had  been  a   Communist;
that  he  has  thereby  cost  her  her  job  as  a  meat  wrapper  at
the  Weak-Hearted  Meat  Co.,  and  put  her  and  her   children
on relief,  and that  Mary Jones  cannot  henceforth  find  a  job?
Let  me  say  flatly  that  my  answer  is  'No',  and  that  it  is  to
our  eternal  disgrace   that   we  sponsor  such   misuse   of  our
authority.   And  let  me also  ask,  what  is  to  become  of  Mary
Jones  and  her  children?    Who  will  employ  her  unless  it  is
someone  else  whom  we  had  made  a  pariah.
"Do  we   really   expect   that   after   this   sort   of   wanton
cruelty  and  degradation,   she  and  her  children  will  continue
to  think  of  this  country  as  a  land  of  freedom  and  tolerance
for   differences?     Or  have  we  not   more   probably  just  re-
cruited  new  persons  for  the  ranks  of  bitterness  and  extrem-
ism."
—Rep.  James  Roosevelt  (D.  Cal)  in  the  House  April  25.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  May  9, 1960
Quick  Action  at  the  Summit  and  A  Special  Session  Advised   for  Ratification
Gore  Executes  A  ISO-Degree  Turn  and  Comes  Out  For A  Test  Treaty
MYSTERIOUS  REVERSAL: In  what  looked  like  a  com-
plete   180  degree  turn,   Senator  Gore   (D.   Tenn),   made  a
speech  in  the  Senate  April  27  and   said  he  had  resolved  his
doubts  in  favor   of  supporting  the  President  if  he  reaches  a
nuclear  test  agreement  with  the   Russians.     Since  Gore  has
been  carrying the  ball  for  the  AEC  in  both  the  Foreign  Rela-
tions  and  Joint  Atomic  Energy Committees, and  led  the  brow-
beating  given  Dr.  Hans  Bethe  recently at  an  executive session
of   the  latter,  the   speech  evoked   surprise.   One  explanation
(gossip)  was  that  he  had  been  warned  that  if  he  opposed  a
treaty  he  gives up  his  hope  of  being the  Democratic vice-presi-
dential   candidate.     Another    (surmise),   based   on   Gore's
curious  reference  to  the  talks  Senator  Sherman  Cooper   "and
I  and  our wives"  have had  "on  this  subject,"  is that  Mrs.  Gore
and  Mrs.  Cooper  exercised  a  softening  influence.   The  Sena-
tor  insisted,  however,  that  the  terms  of  the  treaty  must  not
deviate  from  those  offered  by  Ike  and  Macmillan  Feb.  11  and
that  a  moratorium  on  smaller  tests  was  not  "to  be  considered
and  made  operative"  until  after  "means  of  detection  are  agreed
to  and  in  operation."    How  do  you  negotiate  without  some
concessions ? Can  Gore  use  these  conditions  as  escape  hatches ?
If  the  Russians  are  wise  they  will  speed  agreement  this  year,
and  Ike  will  call  a  special  Seriate  session.   This  election  year
a  treat)'  can  be  ratified.   Next  year  will  be  more  difficult.
Too Patriotic for  His  Own Good?
SUPREME  COURT:  Last  Monday  agreed  to  hear  the  ap-
peal  of  George  Anastaplo,  denied  admission  to  the   bar   in
Illinois   because   he   refused   to   answer  questions   about   his
political  associations  and  upheld  the  right  of  revolution.    The
bar  examiners,  in  rejecting  him,  admitted  (1)   there  was  no
evidence  of  any  subversive  affiliations  and   (2)   his   "strongly
libertarian  views  .  .  .  are  not  inconsistent  with  those  held  by
many  patriotic  Americans".   The   Court   remanded  the  cases
of  two  University of  Washington   professors,   one  in  history,
the  other  in  Romance  languages   (Howard   L.  Nostrand   and
Max  Savelle)   who  had  refused  to  take  loyalty  oaths.     The
majority  per  curiam  sent  the  case  back  for  a  hearing at which
the  professors   could   explain.     Douglas  and   Black   objected
that  this  was  waste  motion  since  the   State  law  requires  re-
moval  for  refusal  to  take  the  oath  "on  any  grounds."
FULBRIGHT   AND  SUEZ:  The  American  Jewish  commu-
nity  will  be  very  foolish  to  engage  in  bitter  controversy  with
the  humane  and  enlightened   Senator  from  Arkansas  over  its
In Tribute  to  Prof.  Lynd
By  H.  H.  Wilson
Professor,   Political  Science,  Princetm
On  Tuesday,  May  12,  Prof.  Robert  S.  Lynd  will  con-
duct  his  last  seminar  before  retirement  from  the  Dept.
of   Sociology  at   Columbia  University.   There   are   few
American  students,  and  few  students  of  America,  who
do  not  know  his  name.   For  his  classic  studies,   MID-
DLETOWN,   and   MIDDLETOWN   IN   TRANSITION,
have  established  a  standard  of  perception   and  under-
standing  of  American society  that  is  unlikely  to  be  sur-
passed.    His  KNOWLEDGE   FOR  WHAT?  is  a  bril-
liant,  scathing  and creative  analysis  of  American  social
science.   It  is  a challenge  to  all  who care  about America
and  about  learning;  it  is  a  challenge  to  provide "fire  in
the  belly  of   democracy."
There  is  a  time  and a  place  for  an  adequate  analysis
of   Robert   S.   Lynd,   scholar.    Here  one  would  like   to
convey  some  sense  that  Bob Lynd is  a great  teacher  and
a  great  human being.    A  great  teacher  because,  while
maintaining  rigorous  intellectual  standards,  he  has  in-
sisted  on  talking  about  the  crucial  problems;  a   great
human  being  because  he  has  never  ceased  to  be  sensi-
tive  to  the  problems  confronting  his  students  and  his
friends.    To  all  who  know  him,  and  to  many  who  have
never  met  him, he  has  given  courage  to  live  and  study
with  integrity.
Retirement  is  a  misnomer  for  which  one  is  grateful
For  in practice  it  means  that  Prof.  Lynd will  have  time
to  complete  his  major  work  on  a  theory  of  power  in
modern  society,  and  Bob  Lynd  will  continue  to  devote
countless  hours to  encouraging  those  who never  had  the
privilege  of  sitting  in  his  classroom.    A  great   teacher
never  really  retires,  for  his  books,  his  articles,  his  stu-
dents  will  continue  to  encourage,   stimulate,  guide  and
inspire  those  who  seek  a  society  worthy  of   men.
pro-Israel  pressure  in  the  "freedom   of  the  Suez"   amendment
to  the  Mutual  Security  Act.    It  would  be  better  to  stand  on
the   irrefutable   point  made  by  Douglas   of   Illinois:   If   the
World  Bank  could  withhold aid  from  Nasser  to  pressure  him
into  paying  off  the   Suez  canal  stockholders,   why  can't   the
U.S.  threaten  to  withhold  aid  unless  Nasser   respects  interna-
tional  law  and  allows  use of  the  Canal  by all,  including  Israel ?
DON'T  IKE'S  GHOST  WRITERS  READ  THE  PAPERS?
Even  among  the  stuffed   shirts  gathered  for  the  dinner   here
Monday  night  at  which  the  President   appealed   for   foreign
aid,  the  reference  to  Turkey  "as  a  bastion  of  freedom"   evoked
a titter.
"Free  Elections"  in  "Free  Asia":  Rep. Meyer  on  the  Polls  in  Formosa  and Vietnam
"Mr.  Speaker,  when  a  Communist country  holds  an  elec-
tion   we   criticize   the   absence   of   choice   in   the   balloting.
Should  we  not  be  even  more  critical  when  such   elections
take  place  in  what  is  called  the  free  world?    Our press  fre-
quently  refers  to  Formosa  as  a  bastion  of  freedom  in  the
Far  East,  but this is  what happened in  the  recent  election  of
Nationalist China:
"1st,   President   Chiang  Kai-shek  was  the  only   candidate
allowed  on  the,  ballot.    2d,  The  Constitution  was   suspended
for  one  day  because  it  forbade  a  third  term.   3rd,  The  only
way  electors  could vote  against  Chiang  was  to  cast  a  blank
ballot  and so  they  were  thrown out  as  invalid.    4th,  Eighty-
five percent  of  the  Formosans  are native  Taiwanese  but  they
were  allotted  only  two  percent  of  the  electoral  votes."
"Mr.  Speaker, yesterday  I  gave  facts  exposing  the  farce
of  so-called  democratic free  elections  on  Formosa.  .  .  . Now
we  have  word  about  so-called  favorable  election  results  in
Laos.    But  we  hear  little   about  the  use  of  the  army  and
other  measures  to  secure  such  results.    I  know  enough  of
the  facts,  and  have  forewarned   about   them  previously,   to
report  that  instead  of  being  able  to  cite  a  case  of  a  demo-
cratic  free  election  we  will  hear  claims  that  these  elections
have  been  rigged.
"How  long  can  the  prestige   of  Western  democracy  and
freedom  be  sustained  in  the  Far  East  if  there  is  so  little  of
it  or  even  honesty  in  so  many  places  where  we  exert  an
influence?  . .  ."
—Rep.  Meyer  (D.  Vt.)   in  the  House, April   %6-21.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  9,  19>SO
It's  the  Moral  Gap,  Not  the  Missile  Gap.  That  Threatens   Us
(Continued  jroni   Pdge    One)
This   is  a  very  confused  passage,   but   it  is  revealing  in   its
confusions.    It  begins  with  Mr.  Mahon   saying  that  we  cannot
afford   to  wage  a  preventive  war  because  even  if  we  smashed
an  enemy's industries  and  cities  and  killed  millions  of  people,
we  would   be  unable  to  wipe  out  all  the  missile  bases  from
which  he  could—though  in  his  dying agony—wreak  havoc  on
our   cities  and  -people.   But  it   proceeds  to  the   proposition—
on   which   General   Power   and   Mr.   Mahon   agree—that   we
must   have  the   capiibility   to  start   a  war,   and   we  ought   no
longer  to  engage  in    all  of  this big  talk'   about  how  we  would
never  start  a war  so that  we  can  keep  "the  opponent  .  .  .  more
on  tenterhooks"  lest  we  launch  a  preventive  war.
No  Way  to  Make  The  Planet   Safer
But  you  can  only  keep  an  enemy   "on   tenterhooks"   if  you
make  this  kind  of  strategy  look  more  than  a  bluff.   You  have
to  indoctrinate  your  people  with  that  mixture  of  ferocity  and
fanaticism  which  makes  preventive  war  palatable.    You   have
to  build  up  overwhelming  force  great  enough   to  give  you  a
fighting  chance  to  smash  everything the  enemy  has  in  the  first
strike,  crippling  his. retaliatory  power   along  with  his   indus-
trial  capacity.    This   is  a  tall  order,  requiring  a  sharp  stepup
in  the  arms  race  and  a  kind  of  emotional  mobilization, a  con-
stant  human alert.    These,  as  if  by  reflex  action,  would evoke
a  similar  effort  by  the  enemy,  and  pretty  soon  both  sides  would
be  "on   tenterhooks."   The   course  fore-shadowed   in  the   col-
loquy  between  General  Power  and  Mr.  Mahon  is  not  a  course
calculated  to  make  this  planet  a  safer  spot  on  which  to  live.
The  point  of  view,  favored  by  the  Appropriations  Commit-
tee  is that of  the  Air  Force.    It  is  opposed  by  the  Army,  which
thinks  limited  war  more  likely,  and  wants  more  money  spent
on  a  mobile Army  to  wage  it.   The   Air  Force  strategy  is  also
opposed  by  the  Navy,  which   sees  the  Polaris  submarine  as  a
weapon  which  tan  deter  an  attack  because  even  if  our   home-
land   were  destroyed,   these   submarines  could   bring   down   a
farewell  shower  of  death  on  the  enemy's  cities.   The   oppos-
ing  Navy and  Air  Force  viewpoints were  presented  by Admiral
Arleigh  Burke and  Gen.  C.urtis  Le  May  in  some  little  noticed
hearings  held  at  the  end  of  Ma'ch  before  the  Holifield   civil
defense    subcommittee    of    House    Government     Operations.
Maybe  We  Ought  to  Have
Our  Heads  Examined,  Too?
Mr.   [Geo.  H.]  MAHON  [D.  Tex].     It  was  irrational,
I   would  say,  for  the  Japanese  to  have  attacked  us   at
Pearl  Harbor.  .  .  .  So,  it  seems  to  me,  that  anyone  who
starts  a  war  now would be  in  a  measure  guilty  of  lunacy
in  the  first  degree.    We  cannot  always  depend  upon  the
opponent  being  a  rational, clear-headed  type.
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  [Dudley  C.]  SHARP.  .  .  .
If  the  enemy  is  absolutely  sure  that  we  are  going  to  de-
stroy  him  immediately,  I  think  he  would  have  to  be  an
insane  person  to  even  think  of  attacking  us.
Mr.  MAHON.    General  White,  do  you  have  any  com-
ment  on  that  question  which  I  raised?
Gen.     [Thos.  D.]   WHITE   [Chief   of   Staff,   US   Air
Force].    I  do  not  have  any  trouble  about  the  rational,
but   the   irrational   decision   to   wage   atomic   war   cer-
tainly  means  serious  damage  to  both  sides ...  in  that
sort  of   a  situation  both  sides  are  going  to   suffer  dis-
aster.
Mr.  MAHON.    Would it  be  worthwhile  to  try  to  have
a  defense  program  that  would he  adequate  to  cope  with
an  irrational  opponent?    Would  that  be  futile?
Gen.  WHITE.   I  think  we  should  strive  to  have  good
insurance  against  either  a  rational  or  an  irrational  de-
cision.    As  to  the  latter,  it  is  very  difficult   to  say,  be-
cause  we  certainly   could  put  everything  in  the  nation
in  the  defense business  and  we  still  could  not  be  sure  in
my  opinion.
—HOKXI-    AII/»-I>II.   Cni,i.  Hfiii-inyx    'in   flic   IPill    Defense
There  Gen.  Le  May   argued   for   a   "counter-force"    strategy.
He  advocated  an  arsenel  of  big  weapons   so  overwhelming   it
could   knock  out   an   enemy's  cities  and   his   retaliatory   bases
"ii'i   niiii/er   bun   the   war  is  initialed."    Gen.   Le  May,   now
vice  chief  of   staff   for  the   Air  Force,   did   not  argue   for   pre-
ventive  war  hut  the   implication   was  there.
More   threatening  than   the   well-advertised   missile   gap   is
the  widening  moral  gap   implicit   in  these   calculations.     We
hope  these  cold  military  equations,  embodying  so  monstrous
an  absence  of  moral  values  and  human   feelings,  will  not   go
unchallenged  in the  House  and  Senate  debates  over  the  defense
budget.    More  important  than  any  specific  issue  at  the   com-
ing  summit   is  to  save  mankind  from  this  kind   of   thinking.
IFS'  Sprtikx   At  Princeton  Wnr-and-Peacr   Panel  Monday   Might,   May  9,  7:30  p.m.,    Woodroiv   Wilson   Hall
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,    N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.   C.
I.  F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Name   ............
Street   ............
City    ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name   ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
3  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave,   N.  W.
Washington   15.  D.  C.
(or  enter)   my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.........................Zone............State....................
,V!)/«0
for   $2  (6  mos.)  or  $1  (1  yr.)    additional:
.........................Zone............State....................
gift  announcement?           Yes  Q    No  D
NEWSPAPER
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,   D.  C.
Post   Office
V    Stoue's   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  tli»  Act  of  March  3.   1S7S).    Post  dated  Mondays  but   pub
lished  every   Thursday  eicept  the  last  two  Thursdays   of   Aoffnst   and   Den-inner  at    r>«ilS  Nebraska   Ave..  X.  W..  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An    ibdepi-ndnut   \yeekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription-
»F  in   iho   1'   S.:  tn  in  Canada:   *1<1  elsewhere       Air   M«il  rn-.-j     Sir,  to  Europe:   $21)  to   Israel    Acin   mid    4f>i«»
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED