I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960sep19.pdf

============================================================

Special   Issue  on   the  Congo  Crisis
Documentary:  The  Yugoslav  Speech  Through  Which  the  Neutrals  Warned  Mr. Hammarsksjold,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  33
SEPTEMBER   19,  1960
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Calculations  Behind  the  Chaos
United  Nations.  N.Y.,  Sept.  14
Unlike  Humpty  Dumpty,  M.  Lumumba  seems  to  have  suc-
ceeded   in  putting  himself   together  again.     As  of   this  early
morning  moment, on  the  eve  of  what  promises  to  be  a  crucial
session  of  the  UN   Security  Council, it  appears to  be  poor  Mr.
Hammarskjold   who  has  suffered   a  great  fall.    The   future  of
the  Secretary  General  has  been  put  in  question  by  the  savage
personal  attack  launched from  the  Baltika  by  Mr.  Khrushchev
in  his  replies  to  questions  put  by  the  London  Daily   Express.
and   by  Nkrumah's  threat  to  withdraw  Ghana's  troops   from
the  UN   command  in  the   Congo   unless  Mr.  Hammarskjold
reversed  his  policy  and  freed  the  radio stations  and  airports  of
that  country  for   use  by  the  Lumumba  government.  Ghana's
voice  was  the  voice  of  the  uncommitted  Africans,   and   in  re-
sponse  to  it  the  UN  has  backed  down.  The  African   bloc  has
won  its  first  great  victory,  and  Mr.  Hammarskjold  must  de-
pend  upon  it to  protect  him  from  Mr.  Khrushchev  if  the  latter
really  wants  his  head.
Lumumba  the  One  National   Leader
However  poor  an  opinion the  other  African  States may have
of   the   mercurial   and   tempestuous  M.   Lumumba,  he   is  the
Congo's  one  more-than-tribal  national  leader.    As  grateful  as
they  may  be  to  Mr.  Hammarskjold, there  is one  issue on which
they  stand  with  the  former  and  oppose   the  latter,  and   that
is   the   preservation  of   Congolese   unit)-.     Not   that   there   is
anything   sacred   about   the   boundaries  which   the  predatory
Belgians  imposed  three  quarters  of  a  century  ago  in  this   the
dark  heart  of  darkest  Africa,   or  that  other  boundaries  based
on  tribal  or  linguistic differences  might  not  be  more  rational,
but  because  the  Africans  could  not  stand  aside  and  allow  Bel-
gian  intrigue  with  Western  aid  to  detach  its  richest  portions  in
Katanga  and  Kasai  for  a  new  kind  of  colonial  empire, leaving
the  rest  in  hopeless  poverty  for  a  long  time  to  come.
The  Congolese  crisis  has  its  roots  in  the  double  strategy of
Belgium.    The  guiding  motto  of  Brussels  during  its  80  years
of  overlordship  was  "pas  d'elites.  pas  d'ennttis"   (no  elite,  no
troubles)   which  might  be  freely  translated  as,  "if  you  don't
educate  them,  they  won't  know  enough   to  bother  you  about
their  rights."    The  story  of  Belgium's  failure  to  educate  the
Congolese  or  to  prepare  them  for  self-government  is  by  now
too  well  known  to  require  repetition   here.    When  inevitable
changes  were  signalled  by  the  LeopoldviUe  riots  of  January,
1959,  precipitated  by  police  attack  on  an  independence   rally,
Belgium  swung  to  the  corollary  of  its  basic  policy  and   (like
the  Dutch   in  Indonesia)   figured  that  their  best  bet  for  con-
tinued   influence   and   control   was  to   grant   independence   so
abruptly  and  with  so  little  preparation  that  native  ineptitude
would  be  easily  proven   and   Belgian   control  welcomed.     In
this  perspective  the   Force   Pnbliqiie  mutiny  which   gave   the
9*                                                                                                               13
Key  to  the  Confusion  in  the  Congo
"The  CONAKAT  (Confederation des  Associations  du
Katanga)   is   a   party   representing   the   bulk   of   the
tribes  native  to  Katanga,  but  under  very  strong  white
influence.   The  CONAKAT was  originally  a  tribal  asso-
ciation,  but  was  transformed   into  a  political  party  in
no  small  measure  as  a  result  of  intervention  by  white
colons  with   the  assistance  of  many  officials   of  Union
Miniere  and  some  of  the  administration.  .  .  .   Under
white   influence,   the   CONAKAT  has   also    developed
separatist   tendencies,  and   has   been  suspected   of   the
intention   to   participate   in   a   white   sponsored   coup
d'etat  to  create  a  separate  Katanga  state.    Its   leader
is   JMoise  Tshombe."
—House   Foreign    Affairs     Committee:   Staff      Memo-
randum  OH the  Republic   of   the  Congo,  Aug.   2k,  p.   1,5.
Belgians  an  excuse  to  move  back  in  within  a  few  days  of  in-
dependence  may  have  been  unforeseen  but  something  like  this
was  bound  to  happen  and  the  Belgians  counted  on  it,  particu-
larly   to   retain  control   of   Katanga   where   the   bulk   of   the
Congo's  mineral  riches  lie.  There  they  had  at  hand  a  party
formed  under  their  influence  (see  box  on  this  page)  and  with
a  native  leader—Moise  Tshombe—ready  to  do  their  bidding.
Katanga  was  to  become  the  center   of  a  new  loosely   linked
Congolese  federation  or  an  independent   State;  in  either   case,
the   Belgian-British-American  capital   in   the   Katanga   mines
could  go  on  with  their  immensely profitable  enterprise   without
letting  its  fruits  be  garnered  by  higher  taxation  to  modernize
the  rest  of  the  Congo,  or  endangered  by  the  newest  of  bogies
—a  Congolese   Castro.
This   program   required   subtle   footwork.     When   M.  Lu-
mumba  appealed  to  the  United  States  for  military  aid  to  stop
the  Belgian  reoccupation,  his  request  had  to  be  rejected.    The
U.S.   could   not  afford   to  enter  upon   a  direct  frontal   conflict
with  its NATO  ally. When  M.  Lumumba  turned  to the  United
Nations  for  military aid,  the  U.S.  could  not  oppose  this  move
since  the  alternatives were  his  threat  to  invoke  the  help  of  the
Bandung   powers   or,   worse,   the   intervention   of   the   Soviet
Union.    The  U.S.  had  to  maneuver   between   various   risks—
that   of   a   Soviet  foothold    in   Africa,   that   of   offending   the
emerging   African   States  by  taking   sides   only  with   Belgian
colonialism,  and  that  of  embittering  Belgium  as  England   and
France  had  been  embittered  by  our  similar  unwillingness   to
let   them   reoccupy  the   Suez.     In   the   last   analysis,   Belgium
could  not  leave NATO  but  the  African  States  could  swing  to-
ward  the  Soviet  bloc.    Mr.  Hammarskjold  was  able  to  utilize
the   dynamics  of  the   situation   to  get  both  great   Powers   to
acquiesce  in  swift  action  to  rush  military  and  technical  aid  to
the  foundering  Congolese  state.
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  September  19, 1960
(Continued  from   Page   One)
But  if  one  goes  back  and  restudies  the  five  Security  Council
sessions  so  far  held  on  the  Congo  question,  it  soon  appears
that  the  two  big  Powers  and  the   African   bloc  were  not  as
much  in  accord  as  their  votes  on  the  key  resolutions.     The
Congolese   and  the  Africans   generally  regarded  the  Security
Council's  first  resolution  as  designed  in  the  words  of  the  for-
mer  "to  protect  the  national  territory  against  acts  of  aggres-
sion  posed  by  Belgian  troops,"  while  the  Western  powers  re-
garded  it  as a move designed  to  help  the. new  State  restore  law
and  order.    The  resolution  of  July  13-14  said  nothing  of  ag-
gression,  put  no  deadline  on  its  request  that  Belgium withdraw
its  troops,  arid  authorized the  Secretary General  to  provide  the
Congo  "with  such  military  assistance  as may be  necessary until,
through   the   efforts   of  the   Congolese   government,  with  the
technical  assistance  of  the  UN,   the  national  security  forces
may  be  able,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Government,  to  meet  fully
their  tasks."    This  was  the  best  that  could  be  achieved  as  a
common  denominator  of  action  amid  such  diverse  forces.
Danger  Lurked  in  the  Ambiguities
But  what  first  appeared  merely  to  be  tactful  but   innocuous
ambiguities  soon  proved  their   potency.    The   Belgians  were
enabled  to  delay  their  withdrawal,  on  the  claim  that  they  too
were  only  interested  in  upholding  law  and  order,  and  were
ready  to  withdraw gradually as the  UN  troops  took  over  their
policing   duties.    \n  the  meantime,  the  Belgians   used   their
military  presence  to  encourage  secessionism,  especially  in  the
Katanga, and  to solidify Tshombe's  regime with military, finan-
cial  and  technical  advisers.   While  the  rest  of  the  Congo  was
in  chaos,  with  panic  stricken  Belgians pulling  out,  the  mining
enterprises  of  the  Katanga  continued to  operate  with  little dis-
turbance.    This  detachment  of   the  Congo's   richest  province
was  accompanied by a press  campaign  in  the  West  designed  to
undermine   the   Central  Government  of   M.   Lumumba  as  a
Communist  conspiracy; this  reached  a  new  high  of  mendacity
when the  Hearst  New  York  Journal-American  July 21 dreamed
up  a  whole  convoy  of   Polish   ships  carrying  weapons  with
Polish  and  Ukrainian volunteers for  M. Lumumba.
The  second  rift  that  soon  appeared  between  the  West  and
the  African  states  was  over  the  question   of  what   constitutes
interference  in  the  internal  affairs  of  the  Congo.    As  early as
August  8,  we find Mr.  Lodge telling  the  Security Council,  "we
must  reinforce  the  Secretary  General's  view  that  the  United
One  Possible   Clue  to  Belgian   Strategy
"Where   the   door  to   independence   is   ajar   and   the
need  for  massed  political  strength  is  gone,  particularist
tendencies   are  encouraged.  .  .  .  The   decision   of   the
Belgian   government  abruptly   to   grant   independence
had  the  immediate   effect   of   accentuating   .  .  .  seces-
sionist   tendencies  in  the  Congolese  body  politic.   Pre-
mature  granting  of  independence—before  an alternative
elite  and  machinery of  effective  government  have  been
formed—has  potential  as  a  'divide  and  rule'  strategy.
Acceptance  of  this  principle  may,  in  fact,  have  moti-
vated  the  Belgian  government  to  make  this  decision."
—Pro/.  Htiny  L,  Bretton,  University   of   Michigan,
in   a   paper   prepared    for    an   International    Political
Science  Association  round  table  at  Ann  Arbor, Sept.  15.
Nations  cannot  be  drawn  into  the  political  struggle   between
Prime  Minister Lumumba and  Provincial  President  T:;hombe."
This  view was  at  once  challenged   by  the  moderate  and  states-
manlike Mongi  Slim of  Tunisia  who  refused  to  accept  the  view
that  this  was  an  internal  matter  in  which  the  UN  could  not
interfere.    Belgium  had  set  August  6  for  the  withdrawal  of
its   troops  from  Katanga.    "But   it  was  then,"  M.   Slim  de-
clared,  "that  a  new  element  emerged.     It  became  obvious  in
fact  that  forces  organized  by  the  provincial  Governor   among
the  population  of  Katanga  had  determined  to  oppose,  by  the
use  of  arms,  the  landing  of  UN  troops.    These  forces  of  Ka-
tanga  seemed to  be well  armed  and  to  be organized  by  Belgian
officers  forming  part  of  the  Belgian  police  forces."     M.  Slim
charged  that  Belgium  was  itself  responsible  for  this  resistance
to  the UN  command and  added  that  this  "is  even  more obvious
when  we stress the  presence  of  Belgian  advisers  all  around  the
provincial  government  of  Katanga,  and  especially  at  all  eche-
lons  of  the  public  and  security  forces  of  the  region.    In  point
of  fact,  the  head  of  the  Cabinet  of  the  [Belgian]  Prime Min-
ister  was  the  adviser  to  the  head  of  the  provincial  government
of  Katanga."*
*  M.  D'Aspremont  Lynden,  who  has  since  been' appointed
Minister   of   African   Affairs   in   the   Belgian   Cabinet.    See
L'Express  for  September  8  which  reported  that  this  appoint-
ment,  which  was  followed  by  a  sharp  rise  in  Union  Miniere
stock,  had  been  criticized  almost  unanimously  by  the   Belgian
press.    L'Express  said  it   foreshadowed  a  hostile   Congolese
policy  and  that  "at  certain  windows  of  the  capital,  portraits
of   'the  honest  M.  Kasavubu'  have  made  their   appearance."
Tshombe's  Secession   Movement  Pictured  As  Belgian  Farce  by  U.S.  Reporter
"Until  July  this  year,  Katanga  was  a  name  known  only
to   the   buffs   of   the   Stock   Exchange.     Union   Miniere  du
Haut  Katanga  had  been  as  safe   as  A.T.&T.  and  gold   for
years.    It  was  natural—and  correct—that  the  Katanga  bid
.for  secession   from  the.troubled  state  of   Congo  should  be
associated  with  the  tiny  area's  rich  mining  interests.
"One  can  go  further.'    For  perhaps  the  most   significant
fact  about  Katanga nationalism,  secessionism,   independent-
ism  and autonomy-in-confederationism  is  that  these  articles
of  faith  are a  predominantly Belgian  doctrine ...  it  would
appear  there  are  no  strong  feelings  about  secession,  except
among  a  few  Katangese  politicians—and,  of  course,  among
Belgians'  in  Katanga.
"When  Hammarskjold   arrived  at   Elizabethville   [capital
of   Katanga]  airport,   the  people   shouting   'Long  live  Ka-
tanga!   Down  with  the  United  Nations!'  were   exclusively
Belgian.    Only  six   Africans   were   present   in   a   crowd  of
over   one   hundred   people.     Only   one   shouted.     He. cried
'Down   with   confederation!     Long   live   a   united   Congo!'
He   was   arrested   on  the   spot—by   a   Belgian   major—and
hustled  off  to  the  city  jail.    He  happened  to  be  a  member
of   the  local   legislature.   .  .  .
".   .   .   Belgium's   most   unforgivable   acts   were:    firstly,
to   goad  Tshombe.   who  never   understood   what   an   inter-
national  heretic  he  was  becoming,   into  defying   the  United
Nations  .  .  .  secondly,  to  encourage  his  movement  to  the
point   of   writing   his   'independence'   constitution   .  .   .  by
training  his  para-military police  (an  army  in  all  but  name)
.   .  .  and  drafting   the   'nine  conditions'  ultimatum  to   UN
regarding  acceptance  of  UN  forces.  .  .  .
"It  was  obvious,  all  along,  that  Belgian  troops  (including
the  Belgian  officers  in  Tshombe's  private  army)  would  not
dare   fire   on   UN.    Yet   Belgium   encouraged   Tshombe   to
launch  his   famous,  appeal  to  Katangese  chiefs  to  prepare
the  poison  for  the  arrows.   .  .  ."
—Russell  tfoive,   in  the  Washington  Post,  Sept.  9.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stout's  Weekly,  September   19, 1960
Non-intervention  Became  Intervention
To  the  Africans,   M.  Hammarskjold's   policy  of  non-inter-
vention  thus  began  to  seem  another  form  of  intervention.     In
the  meantime,  while  the  West  was  carrying  on  this  farce  be-
hind  the  scenes  the  Russians  were  moving  outside  the  frame-
work  of  the  UN   to  make  M.  Lumumba  beholden  to  them.
The  whole  idea  of  UN   intervention  was  to  keep  the  two  big
powers  out  of  direct  involvement   in  the  Congolese   crisis,  an
idea  which  was  warmly  supported  by  the  Africans.    The   Sov-
iets  began  to  put  air  transport  at  the  disposal  of  M.  Lumumba
for  the  movement  of  his  troops.   Here were  the  seeds  of  addi-
tional  trouble.     In  a  note  of  September  5,  the  Secretary   Gen-
eral  asked  the  Soviet  Union   "about  the  nationality  and  status
of  the  crev.-s  of  the  troop  transporting  planes,  which  presum-
ably  are  now  under  the  control  of  the  Congo  Government,"
adding  "the   significance  of   this   information  will   be   appre-
ciated  in  view  of  the  precedent  that  may  be  created."    To  this
the  Soviets  replied  on  November  10  with  a  note  which  was  a
challenge  to  the  whole  UN   operation,  saying  that  the   reso-
lution  of  the  Security  Council   "does  not  restrict,  nor  can  it
restrict,  the  right  of  the  Government  of  the  sovereign  Repub-
lic  of  the  Congo  to  request  assistance  from  the   Governments
of  other  countries, apart  from  the  United  Nations,  and  to  re-
ceive  such  assistance.    Nor   does  it  give  United  Nations   offi-
cials  any right  to  control  the  assistance  rendered  to  the  Repub-
lic  of  the  Congo  by  any  State  at  the  request  of  the   Congolese
government."    But  how  seal  the  Congo  dispute  off from  direct
intervention  by  the  two  big  Powers  if  one  of  them  began  to
Not  So  Neutral
"Mr.  Hammarskjold  wants  more  authority  to  inter-
vene   directly  in   internet   Congolese   affairs   for   two
reasons,   one  stated  and  the  other   private.   The   main
reason   is   that   of   preserving  law   and  order   in   the
country.   The  other  reason,  which  the  formally  neutral
Mr.  Hammarskjold  doesn't   talk   about,  is  that  of  pre-
venting  Russia  and  its  satellites  from  grabbing  control
of  first  the  Congo  and  then  the  rest  of  Central Africa.
"While   the   Security   Council   debates   whether   he
should   be   given   authority   to   disarm   the   Congolese
army,   Mr.  Bammarskjold   has   already   begun   doing
so.  ...        Although  no  one  has  formally   given  the
UN  command  in  the  Congo   authority   over  Congolese
troops,  it  appears  to  have  gained  this  control  by  the
device   of   paying   the   Congolese   troops   for   the   first
time  in  weeks.   This  step   apparently  helped  the   UN
to   get   Congolese   Army   officers   to   declare   a   truce
in  their  operations  against  President  Moise  Tshombe's
secessionist   Katanga  province.
"Mr.  Hammarskjold has  also  thrown  off  his   previous
insistence  on  following  the  letter  of  the  law.    He  told
the  Security  Council  the  seriousness  of  the  Congo crisis
outweighs    the   need    for   a   strict   interpretation    of
legalisms."
—Wall   St.   Journal,   from   Washington,  Sept.  12.
give  direct  assistance  outside  the  framework  of  the  UN  oper-
ation?    Mr.  Hammarskjold   referred   to  this  in  his  report  to
the  Security  Council  the  night  of  September  9  when  he  spoke
of  "aggravating  elements  introduced  into  the  picture  by  inter-
(Contmued  on  Page  Four)
Yugoslav  Delegate  First  Voices  Neutral
"We  have  before  us   the   question   of   the   character   and
extent  of  outside  interference in  the  Republic  of  the  Congo
and  of  certain  shortcomings demonstrated by  the  practices
of   the   Command   of   the   UN   forces.  .  .  .
"The  aggression  of  the  Belgian   troops  .  .  .  was  .  .  .
the  basic  cause  of  the  entire  negative  course  of  events.  .  .  .
On  13  July   1960 ...  the  [Security]  Council  called  upon
the   government   of  Belgium  to  withdraw  its   troops.   .  .  .
On  22  July   the   Council  again  had  to  request'.   .  .  with-
drawal   as   soon   as   possible.   .   .  .
"All   this  notwithstanding,   the   Council  found  itself   in
the   position  of   having  to  call  once  again,   on   9   August,
upon  the   government  of   Belgium   to  withdraw  its   troops
from   the   entire   territory  of   the   Congo,   more   precisely
from   the  Province  of  Katanga  and  its  military  bases.   In
spite  of  all  this,  we  heard  on  24  August  once  again  reas-
surances  on  the  subject  of  the  withdrawal  of   the   Belgian
troops,  which  was  being  brought  into  effect  with   incessant
postponements  and  various  unfounded  difficulties.  .  .  .  Not
even  today  are  we  precisely   informed  whether  or  not  the
withdrawal   of   Belgian   troops   has   been   completely    ef-
fected.   .  .  .
"The   continued   stationing   of   Belgian   troops   in   some
areas   had  certain   additional  and   very   negative    political
consequences,  inevitably  encouraging  and  supporting   weak
secessionist   currents  .  .  .  even  the  evacuation  of  the  great-
est  part,  or,  for  that  matter,  let  us  say,  of  all  the   Belgian
armed   forces   did   not   completely    end   the   outside   inter-
ference   in   the   internal   affairs   of   the   Congo.   .   .  .  The
deliveries   of   armaments   to   the   secessionist   ringleaders,
Tshombe   and  Kalonji,  foreign   military   personnel   in   the
units  of  their  military  or  police  forces ...  all  this  is not
and  cannot  be  in  conformity with  the  request  of  the   Secu-
rity   Council. ...
"Now   I  turn  to   the   practices  of   the   Command  of   the
UN  forces.  .  .  .  Some  reluctance,  well  know  to  all  of  us,
to  send  the  UN  troops  into  the  Province  of  Katanga  during
Discontent  With  UN's  Role  In  the  Congo
the  very  beginning  of   the   UN   action  in  the  Republic  of
the  Congo  was  the  first  serious   symptom  of  possible   fric-
tion.   .   .   .   Because   of   a   certain   interpretation   of   non-
interference  .  .  .  the  Command  of  the  UN   forces  has  not
found   sufficient   necessary   and  indispensable  ways  of   pre-
venting  military  and  other  outside  help  from  being  given
to  the  secessionist  ringleaders.   .  .  .  All  military  equipment
put  at  the  disposal  of  these .people  should  be  confiscated.
.  .  .  Foreign  personnel  should  be  removed  from  each  and
every  local  formation.  .  .  .
'"In   all   this,   appropriate   cooperation  with   the   Central
Government,  which is  legally  entitled  to  exercise  its  author-
ity/in  the  integral  whole  of  the  Congo,  is  necessary.    Lack
of   resolution  in  this  respect   was   and  is   infringing   upon
the  legal   rights  of  the  Central  Government.  .  .  .
"I  assume  that  all  of  us  here  are  in  complete  agreement
that  it  is  necessary  to  solve  the  controversy   between   the
Republic  of   the   Congo  and  the  UN   Command  concerning
control  over  the  airports  and  over  the  seizing  and  closing
down  of   the   Leopoldville  radio  station  by   the  Command.
To  what  extent  this  is  intolerable   can  be  illustrated  by  the
fact  that  the  Commander  of  the  Congolese  national  security
forces  in  person   could  not  .  .  .  land  at  the   Leopoldville
airport.     It   is   understandable   that   such   measures,   not
being  taken  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Government,  and
preventing   the   discharge   of   its   normal   functions,    must
provoke   conflict.   .  .  .  The  same   clearly   applied   to  the
essential   right   of   the   Government   to   use   its   transport
and  radio   facilities. ...
"Further   developments   in  such   a  direction   could  bring  .
almost  unbearable  relations  between   the  Government  and
the  UN  Command  which  could  result  in  orientation   of  the
Government  to  seek  aid  from  friendly  countries.  .  .  .  It  is
not   difficult   to  foresee  what  consequences   this  could  have
for   the  United  Nations."
—Mr.  Vidic,  Yugoslavia,  in  the  Security  Council  Sept.  9.
1  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September    Iff,     1960
Mr.  Hammarskjold's   Future  in  Doubt  Unless  He  Can Again  Rally  Africans
(Continued   from   Page  Three)
ference   from   the  outside."     He   said  that  while   the   Soviet
actions,   unlike  the   continued   shipment   by  the   Belgians   of
munitions  to  Katanga,  were  not  directly  in  violation  of  Secur-
ity  Council  resolutions,  "I  think  it  should  be  recognized  that
this  is  no  longer  a  question  of  form  and  legal  justification but
a  question  of  very hard  realities."    The  planes,  though  piloted
by  civilians  as  the  Russians  claimed,  constituted  military  aid
since  M.  Lumumba  was  using  them  to  ferry   troops.
Belgium's  New  Hope:  Kasavubu
The  picture  is  still  murky.    Much  remains  to  be  known.
But  Mr.  Hammarskjold's  answer  to  the  furnishing  of  Soviet
transport   seems  to  have  been   UN   seizure  of  control   at  the
airports.    Mr.   Hammarskjold   told   the   Security  Council   the
night  of  September  9  that  the  airports  were  closed   "for   all
but  United  Nations   operations,   so  as  to  be  certain  that  the
United  Nations  would  be  able  to  operate  in  fulfilment   of  its
mandate,  whatever  happened."     With  the  closing  of  the  air-
ports,  the  UN  command  also  took  over  the  radio  stations, pre-
sumably  to  prevent  aggravation  of  the  crisis  which  arose  on
September  5 when  the  President,  M.  Kasavubu,  Belgium's  new
black   hope,  and  the  Prime  Minister,  M.  Lumumba,  tried  to
fire  each  other.    But  in  taking  over  the  means  of  communica-
tion,  the  UN  was  in  effect  taking over  the  Congo.    If  the  UN
had  ended  the  secessionist   movement   in  Katanga   and   made
clear   that   it  was  preserving  the   integrity  of   the   Congolese
state,  a  UN   protectorate  for   several  years  might   have  been
palatable  to  the  Africans;  the  Congo  obviously  is  not  yet  ready
for   self-government.    But  to  take  over  the  Central   Govern-
ment  when  Belgian  mining  interests  and  their  puppet   were
in  effective  control  of  Katanga  was  a  form  of  intervention  the
African  states  could  not  accept.    There  followed  a  protest  by
Yugoslavia,  which  in  this  was  speaking  for  the  neutrals   (see
box  bottom  of  p.  3)   and  the  threat  by Nkrumah  to  withdraw
the  troops  of  Ghana  from  the  UN  forces.    Mr.  Hammarskjold
had  to  back  down,  releasing  the  radio  and  the  airports,  while
the  parliament  in  Leopoldville  by  supporting   M.   Lumumba
frustrated   Belgian  hopes  of   establishing  a  new   government
headed  by  M.  Kasavubu  which  would   be  willing  to  work  in
The   Congo  Seems  to  Be   Divisible
Even  If  "Freedom"  Isn't
"Asked  if  the  Congo  would  be  'worth  going  through
another   Korea,'  the  Governor  answered:  "I  think   free-
dom   is   indivisible.   .  .   .  We  have   got   to  be  ready   to
fight    for   it   whether   it   is   in   Korea   or   Hungary   or
Congo.   .  .  .  We   have   got   to  be  ready   to   protect   the
forces   of   freedom."
—A'eic   York    Times    report-   Sept.   5   on   Governor
Rockefeller's      appearance      oil    ABC's    Open    Hearing
Sept.  4.
"But    at   the   moment   the   essential   problem   which
determines  the  whole   future   of   the  Congo  is  that  of
Katanga.    Since  the  Round  Table  conference  held  last
January   in  Brussels,   M.  Lumumba  has   denounced   the
maneuvers   of   politicians   in  Katanga   who,    under   the
pretext   of   preserving   the   autonomy   of   the   province,
demand   its   detachment   from   the   Congo.    This sep-
aratist   movement,   which   culminated  11 .days  after   the
grant   of   independence,   in   M.  Tshombe's   proclaiming
the   independence    of   Katanga   and  its   economic   union
with   Belgium,    was   stimulated    by   financial   circles   in
Brussels   associated    with    those   of    British    Rhodesia
and  of  certain   American  interests  like  the   Rockefeller
group  which  has  influential  shares  in  Katanga."
—Pierrc   Stibbc    iit   Fraiice-Observatetir,   July    14.
loose  confederation  with  their  man,  Tshombe.
What   the  Security  Council  is  about   to  do  at  this  writing,
what  the  immediate  consequences  will  be  for  Mr.  Hammar-
skjold  and  the  UN,   cannot  be  told  until  next  week.    But  it
would  be a  pity  for  the  African  states  and  for  the  world  if  the
UN  were  to  be  torn  apart  over  the  Congolese  issue  and  if  so
able  and  devoted  an  international  public  servant  as  Mr.  Ham-
marskjold  were  to  lose  his  post.    For  the  great   Powers,   the
UN   is  a  sideshow,  but  for  the  newly  emerging  nations  it  is
their  one  hope.    It  would  be  tragic  if  great  power  rivalry  in
the  Congo  were  to  swamp  the  UN,   for  the  job  it  has  done
there so far  has  after  all  frustrated  Belgian  hopes  of  Congolese
collapse,  provided   a  funnel  for  desperately   needed   technical
and  financial  aid, and  created  a  channel  through  which  peace-
ful  settlement  with  full  justice  to  Congolese  aspirations  is  still
possible.    We  hope.
We'll   Send   A  Free  Sample   Copy   of   This   to   A  Friend    If    You   Provide   Stamped   Self-Addressed     Envelope
I.   F.
Pleasi
Name
•Street
City
Enter
(To)
Street
City
Shall
Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
>  renew   (or  enter)  my  sub  for   the  enclosed  $5:*
..______•«_
gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1
we  send  gift   announcement?
""""fl'/io/w
yr.)   additional:
Yes "n""No"D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second   Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   nub
llshed  every   Thursday   except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington  15 DC
An   independent   weekly   published   and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription-'     '    '
»5  In  the  U.  S.:  K   In  Canada:   SIO  elsewhere.    Air  Hail  rates:  S15  to  Europe:  «20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED