I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jun27.pdf

============================================================

How  Kennedy  Echoes Adenauer,  P.  2
Supreme   Court  Reverses  Ex-FBI  Man  Judge  Who  Ruled in  Favor  of  A  Communist,  See  Page  3
L F, Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  26
JUNE   27,  1960
'«'     WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
Just  Like  the  Good  Old   Days   of  Low  Blow  Joe
At  the  opening  of  the  hearing  to  question  Dr.  Linus  Paul-
ing,  the  vice  chairman  of   the  Senate  Internal  Security  Sub-
committee,  Senator  Dodd   (D.  Conn),  said  it  was  not  inter-
ested  in  the  scientific  merits  of  the  controversy but  only  in  in-
vestigating  the  possibility  that  Communists  might  have  been
involved  in  it.   But  if  the  movement to  end  nuclear  testing,  in
which  Dr.  Pauling  has  played  so  leading  and  praiseworthy a
role,   is   scientifically   and   morally   justified,   does   it   matter
whether   Communists  are   also  for   it?    If   the   movement  is
wrong,  would  it  be  any  less  so  if  it  could  be  proven  that  only
politically  pasteurized  and  certified  non-Communists had  par-
ticipated  in it?
A Less Than Perfect  Right
There  are  major  questions  of  morality,  science,  politics  and
military   strategy   involved   in   the   controversy   over  nuclear
testing.   They   call  for   the  fullest   and  most  serious  debate.
How  can  that  debate  be  carried  on  if  those  on  one  side  of  the
controversy  are  in  danger  of  being  called  up  and  linked  in  the
public  mind  with  disreputable  people?   To  put  aside  the  fun-
damental  questions  in  the  controversy,  and   focus  instead  on
the  political  coloration  and  associations  of  those  in  it  may  be
effective  but  it  is  not  debate.   Senator  Dodd  delivered  a  long
closely  argued  through  fallacious  speech   in  the  Senate  May
12  against  cessation  of  testing.   That  was  one  kind  of  speech.
He  followed  it  on  May  25  by quite  a  different  variety, attack-
ing  the  National  Committee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy  in  a
speech  entitled,  "The   Communist  Infiltration  in  the  Nuclear
Test  Ban  Movement",   buttressed   by  the  name  of   one  (1)
alleged   Communist  his  subcommittee  had   discovered   in   the
group   which   arranged   the   recent   Madison   Square   Garden
meeting.   Dodd's  second   step   in  the  same  direction   was  to
serve  a  subpoena  on  Dr.  Pauling  when  he  finished  making  an
address   to   the   Jane   Addams   centennial   meeting   of   the
Women's  International   League  for   Peace  and  Freedom  here
June  18.  Senator  Keating  (R. N.Y.),  echoing  Senator  Dodd's
remarks  at  the  opening  of  the  hearing,  told  Dr.  Pauling,   "We
are  in  no  way  interested  in  your  views.   This  is  not  a  forum
in  which  to  test  the  merits  of  the  nuclear   controversy.   You
have  a  perfect  right  to  express  those  views."   It  does  not  re-
quire a very long  memory  to  recognize  that  the  right  is a  little
less  than  perfect  in  such  a  context.
Not  only  the  tactics  but  the  cast  of  characters  was  familiar.
Ten  years ago  the  Senate  Internal  Security subcommittee  under
McCarran  and  a  Government  Operations  subcommittee  under
McCarthy  began  to  make  rational  debate  on  China  policy  im-
possible   by  their   respective   "investigations"  of  the   Institute
for  Pacific  Relations,  Prof.  Owen  Lattimore  and  the  State  De-
partment.   We  still  suffer  from  this  episode  in  government  by
slander.   On  the  high  bench  in  the  hearing  room  beside  Sena-
7  *
WILPF  Supports Dr. Pauling
"The   annual  meeting  of   the  Women's  International
League  for  Peace  and  Freedom  wishes  to  express  its
unqualified  support of  the  position of  Dr.  Linus Pauling
in  respect  to  the  cessation  of  nuclear  testing   and  to
commend  his  willingness  to  maintain  this  stand  in  the
face  of  attempted  intimidation  by  the  Senate  Internal
Security  Subcommittee.   The  WILPF  is  convinced  that
the  survival  of  the  human  race  depends upon  the  cour-
age   of   those  who,  like   Dr.   Pauling,  oppose  nuclear
testing   and  the   continuation  of   the   arms  race.   The
WILPF  welcomed  the  opportunity  to  hear  at  its annual
meeting  the  views of  an  internationally recognized  ex-
pert  in  this  field  and joins  with  Dr.  Pauling  in  his  dis-
sent   against   the   continuance  of   a   suicidal  national
policy."
—Resolution   voted   by   the   Women's    International
League  for  Peace and  Freedom at  its  Jane  Addams  cen-
tennial   meeting,   June   20,   after    a   Senate    Internal
Security   subpoena  had  been  served  on  Dr.  Pauling  at
the   close  of  a  speech  before    the  organization.   It  also
voted   a  resolution  calling  for   abolition  of   the  House
Un-American  Activities   Committee.
9   3
tor  Dodd   sat  two  veteran  participants  in  that  episode—the
subcommittee's  counsel,  Jules  Sourwine,  and  its  research  di-
rector,  Benjamin  Mandel,  who  graduated  from   the   business
managership  of  The  Daily  Worker  via  the  Lovestone  move-
ment  to  the   House  Un-American  Activities  Committee    staff
and   thence  to  the   Senate  committee  under   McCarran.
Despite  the  "soft  sell"  manner of  the  Senators,  the  scene  as
it  unfolded  seemed  a  replay  of  what  we  witnessed  a  decade
earlier.   Here  was  Sourwine  asking  Dr.   Pauling  whether  on
February  22,   1951,   he  had  signed   a  letter  sent   out  by  trie
Southern   California   chapter   of   the   Council   of   the   Arts,
Sciences  and  Professions  soliciting  contributions  to  publish  a
pamphlet   on  the  danger  of  atomic  war.   And  did  he  know
that  another  signer  of  that  letter  had  in  1947   "refused   under
oath"  to  tell  the  House  Committee  whether  he  was a  Commu-
nist  although  it  had  a. membership  card  No.  46844  made  out
in  the  name  of  this  Hollywood  personality?  .In  that  old  well-
remembered  fashion,  there  was  no  effort  made  to  show  what
this  had  to  do  with  Dr.  Pauling's   campaign  a  decade   later
against  nuclear  testing,  just  as  there  was  no  reason  given  for
suddenly  asking  Dr.  Pauling  whether  he  knew  Dr.  Willard
Uphaus  whom  he  vaguely  remembered  meeting.    There  was
even  the   solicitous  concern  for   the   inexorable   deadlines   of
journalism   which  Joe  used  to  show.   When  Dr.  Pauling  ad-
mitted  that  he  had  once  been  a  vice  president  of  the  World
Federation  of  Scientific  Workers   and,  yes,  that  he  knew  the
late   Frederic   Joliot-Curie   (whose   name  Mr.   Sourwine   pro-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  27,1960
Kennedy  on  Germany, Like  Ike,  Differs  Little  from  Adenauer
Liberals  ready  to jump on  the  Kennedy  bandwagon  had  bet-
ter  take  a  long,  hard  look  at  his  latest  foreign  policy  speech  in
the  Senate  before  they  leap.   What  Senator  Kennedy  said  in  it
of  the  Eisenhower  Administration  also  applies  to  himself  and
all  of  his  fellow  Democratic  hopefuls  except  Adlai  Stevenson.
"We   have  no  fresh  ideas,"  Kennedy,  said,   "with  which   to
break  the  stalemate  in  Germany,  the  stalemate  over  arms  con-
trol, the stakmate in Berlin.  . . . We have as our grand  strategy
only  the  arms  race  and  the  cold   war."
Demagogic Nonsense About the U-2
Indeed   in  some  respects  Kennedy  is  inferior  to  the  Presi-
dent.   While  Eisenhower   says  nuclear   war   is   preposterous,
Kennedy  is  sure  that  if  we  only  spend  enough  money,  we  can
achieve   nuclear   invulnerability   and   "ultimate  missiles."   To
say  as he  does  that  the  summit  "was  doomed  to  failure  because
we  have  failed  for  the  past  eight  years  to  build  the  positions
of  long  term  strength  essential  to  successful  negotiation"  is as
hollow  an  echo  of  the  arms  lobby  as  anything  said  by  the
vacuous  Symington.  To  say as  Kennedy  does  that  the  summit
was  "doomed  to  failure  long before the  U-2 ever  fell  on  Soviet
soil  .  .  .  because  the  Soviet  Union  knew  it  had  more  to  gain
from  the  increasing  deterioration  of  America's  world   position
than  from  any  concessions  which  might  be  made  in  Paris"  is
not  serious  analysis  but   demagogy.
The  essential  lack  of  new  ideas  in  Kenndy's  own  approach
is  most  striking  at  the  very point  where  the  world  situation  is
most  dangerous—Berlin.  This  is what  Kennedy  had  to  say:
"We  must  plan  a  long-range  solution  to  the  problems  of
Berlin.  We  must  show  no  uncertainty  over  our  determination
to  defend  Berlin  and  meet  our  commitments—but  we  must
realize  that  a  solution  to  the  problems  of  that  beleaguered
city  is  only  possible  in  the  long  run,  in  the  context  of  a  solu-
tion  of  the  problems  of  Germany  and,  indeed,  the  problems of
all  Europe.   We  must  look   forward  to  a  free   Berlin,  in  a
united  Germany,  in  a  Europe  where  tensions  and armaments
have  been  reduced—where  perhaps the  suggestions  of General
de  Gaulle  and Premier  (sic)  Adenauer  requiring  Soviet  with-
drawal  behind the  Urals  can  be  accepted."
This  is  as  devoid  of  new  ideas  as  the  Dulles-Acheson  ap-
proach,  which  was  to  rearm  Western  Germany  and  sit  tight,
waiting  for  something  fo  turn  up,  or  blow  up.   The  reference
to  de  Gaulle  ludicrously  distorts  what  he  said  in  his  speech
May  31  on  the  summit  conference.   De  Gaulle  envisioned  an
How  Much Is  Enough?
"Our   task  is  to  rebuild  our  strength ...  to  confine
national  posture  to   one  of  talking  louder   and  louder
while  carrying  a  smaller  and  smaller  stick  is  to  itrade
the  long-range needs  of  the  nation  and  the  free world
for   the  short-term  appearance  of   security."
—Kennedy  on foreign  policy, Senate  June  14.
"Senator   Kennedy  .  .  .  recently   cited  figures  that
would  mean  our  arsenal  now  contains  the  equivalent  of
1,250,000  bombs  of   the  type  that  levelled  Hiroshima.
This  was  confirmed  in  substance  by  Thomas  E.  Murray,
former  Atomic  Energy  Commissioner,  when  he  said  we
now  have  more  than   enough  weapons  to   destroy   the
world."
—Same  day's  Congressional Record at  page A  50S2
from  atomic  series  by  Wm.  Hines  in  the  Wash-
ington  Star,  June   IS.'
ultimate  European   reconciliation  including   Russia,  "a  Euro-
pean  entente  from   the  Atlantic  to  the  Urals"  when   Europe
"no  longer  split  in  two  by  ambitions  and  ideologies   become
out  of  date,  would  again  be  the  heart  of  civilization,"    This
was  quite  different   from   (in   Kennedy's  words)   "requiring
Soviet  withdrawal  behind  the  Urals." *
British  Compromises   Rejected
The  hollowness  of  Kennedy's  approach  may  be  seen  if  it  is
compared  with  the  British.   The  British  have  pressed  (1)  for
some   form   of   disengagement   and   Central   European   arms
limitation  which  would  allay  Russian  fears  of  a  resurgent  re-
armed  Germany,  and  (2)   for  some  new  guaranteed   interna-
tional  status  for  Berlin  to  safeguard  the  city  so  long  as  the
Reich  remains  divided.    Adenauer  vetoed  both  ideas  in  favor
of  standing  pat  while  the  arms  buildup  continues  in  the  hope
of  some  day  forcing  a  Russian  surrender.   Eisenhower  fell  in
with  Adenauer's  views.   So  does  Kennedy.
*The  tone  of  de Gaulle's  speech  may  be  judged  from  his  de-
scription  of   the   Khrushchev  regime:  "It  was   then  that  in
Soviet  Russia  a  new  tune  was  heard.   A  statesman   who had
reached   the   top   proclaimed  the   necessity   of   peaceful   co-
existence,  declared that  the  competition between  the  Commu-
nist  system  and the  capitalist  system  should  have  as  its  goal
men's  standard  of  living,  affirmed   that  the  ambition   of   his
own  country was to  insure  its  own development. ..."
Kennedy  Agreed  With  Dulles  on  Berlin  But  Wanted  Bigger  Military Buildup
Mr.  Howard  K.  SMITH  (CBS News):  Senator,  what about
Mr.  Dulles'  policies?   Are  you  in  disagreement  with  him?
Senator  Mansfield  made quite a strong  attack  on his  policies
last   week   in   the   Senate.     How   do   yon   feel   about   the
German—
Senator  KENNEDY: Well,  on  the—the  question  of  West-
ern  Germany,  I  am  not  in  disagreement  with  Mr.  Dulles.
Except  in  one  respect,  and that  is,  and  I'm  in  disagreement
with  the  Administration,  and  that  is,  I  think  that  Western
Germany  is  an extremely  serious  situation.  I  do  think  that
it's  going  to  reach  a  climax  in  May  or  June.   It  is  possible
that  the  Soviet  Union will  attempt to  prevent  our maintain-
' ing  our supplies by  force  with  Berlin,  and that  at  that  time
we   are   going   to   be   faced   with   an   extremely    perilous
situation.
I  would  think  that  it  is  important  that  the  U.  S.  made
clear  that  its  determination to  maintain its  communications
with  Berlin,  that  while  we  may  be  willing  to  negotiate  on
the  question  of  missiles  and atomic-weapons  in  the  hands of
West  Germany,  and  thinning  our  troops,  and  all  the  rest,
on  the  question  of  our  rights  to  maintain  our  position  in
Berlin,  I  don't  think  we  can  negotiate.
Now,   when  that  time comes,  if  they turn it  off, it  seems  to
me  we  are  going  to  have  to  make  an  appeal  to  the  United
Nations,  but  in  the  final  analysis  we  are  going  to  have  to—
demonstrate   our  determination  to   maintain  our   position.
Otherwise,  I  think  West  Germany is  gone,  and  our  position
in  Europe  is  gone.
For  that  reason  I  think  not  enough  attention  has  been
paid  to  the  possibility  that  there  may  be  a  possibility  of
force  inherent  in  the  situation  in  West  Berlin,  and  I  don't
think  the  statement  of  Mr.  Quarles  about  a  month  ago  in
Germany  about  thinning  out  our  troops  unilaterally  is  help-
ful,  and  I  would  certainly  put  a  good  deal  more  effort  into
perfecting   our   military  posture   in   West   Germany  and
throughout  Europe  in  preparation for  what  is  going  to  be a
great  climax  and possibly  a  show  down.
—Kennedy  on Face  The Nation, Feb. SS, 1959.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  27,1960
Fear  of  Freedom
"A  basic  constitutional  infirmity  of  this  Act,  in  my
judgment,  is  that  it  is  a part  of a  pattern  of  laws all of
which  violate  the  First   Amendment  out  of   fear  that
this  country  is  in  grave  danger  if  it  lets  a  handful  of
Communist  fanatics or  any  other  extremist  group make
their  arguments  and  discuss   their  ideas.   This  fear,  I
think,  is  baseless.   It  reflects   a  lack  of  faith  in  the
sturdy  patriotism  of  our  people  and  does  not  give  the
world  a  true picture  of  our  abiding strength."
—Mr.  Justice  Black  dissenting  in  the  Nestor  case.
The  Case  of the  Ex-FBI  Man  Who  Ruled  in  Favor  of  A  Red
Some  years  ago  when  Edward  A.  Tamm  was  appointed   to
sit  on  the  Federal  District  Court  in  the  District  of  Columbia,
I  wrote  an  article  for  the  newspaper   PM   opposing   the  ap-
pointment  on  the  ground  that  he  was  an  FBI  man,  and  that
this  background  was  poor  training  for  a  Judgeship.    I   still
think  I  was right  as  a  general  proposition,  but  I  proved  to  be
wrong  in this particular case as Judge  Tamm  demonstrated  un-
mistakably  in  January of  last  year.   A  man  deported  in   1956
to  his  native  Bulgaria  for   having  been  a  Communist   from
1933  to   1939  filed  suit  for  his  old  age  pension  and   other
rights  under  the  Social  Security  Act.   His  name  was  Ephraim
Nestor,  and  the  case  came  before  Judge  Tamm.
His Wife Remained Behind
Nestor  had  immigrated  to this  country  in  1913.  At  the  time
he  left  the  Communist  party,  it  was  neither  a  crime  to  be  a
member  nor  was  it  grounds  for  deportation;  he  was  deported
under  the  Internal  Security  Act  of   1950.    In  1954,  over  the
objections  of  the  Department  of  Health,  Education  and  Wel-
fare,  Congress amended the  Social  Security  Act  to  provide that
a  person   deported  for   past  membership  in   the  Communist
Party  should  lose  his  social security  benefits.   Nestor  had  made
social  security payments from  1936  to  1955.   He  claimed  he
had  a  right  to  his  old  age  pension  and  to  survivor  payments
for  his wife  who  remained in  this  country.  Judge  Tamm  held
this  punitive  amendment  by  Congress   unconstitutional   and
ruled  in  favor  of  Nestor.
When  I  was  in  East  Germany and  Poland  last  spring,  and
discussed  questions  of  civil  liberties  with  Communists,  I  told
this  story,  indeed  I  boasted  of  it.   I  told  those  with  whom  I
discussed  these  problems,  "When  you  Communists  have  legal
traditions  so strong that a Judge  who  used  to  be  a  secret  police
agent  can  rule  in  favor  of  a  proven  and  exiled   anti-Commu-
nist,  you'll  have something to be proud  of,  too.   Your  socialist
legality will then  be a  reality."
I  now find unhappily that  I  spoke  too  soon.    Last  Monday,
the   Supreme   Court,   5-to-4,  speaking   through   Mr.   Justice
Harlan,  reversed  Judge  Tamm.   The  majority  held,  contrary to
what  was  said  in  Congress  when  the  Social  Security  Act  was
first  written,  that  its  benefits  are  "gratuities"  in  which  a  man
has  no  accrued  rights  despite  his  accrued  payments.  The  ma-
jority  also  held  that  to  bar  deported  Communists  from  these
benefits  was  neither  "punitive"   (and  therefore  subject  to  the
safeguards  of  the  criminal law)  nor  so  irrational  as  to  be  un-
constitutional.    Warren,   Black,   Douglas   and   Brennan   dis-
sented.  The  decision  opens  the  door  to writing  other  forms of
political  discrimination  into  the  social  security  laws.   Maybe
we're  not  as  far  ahead  of  the  Soviet  bloc  in  legal  fairness  as  I
thought.   It's  hard  to be an anti-Communist there.   It's  hard  to
be  a  Communist  here,  not  quite  as  hard,  but  hard  enough  to
shame  our  pretensions.
And  Now  What  About  the  Civil  Rights  of White  Supremacists?
Try  this  little  exercise.   It  will  help  you understand  yourself
and  the  nature  of  the  law.   Ask  yourself,  "Do  I  believe  that
witnesses  before a  Congressional  investigation  should  have the
right  to  confront  and  cross-examine their  accusers?"  Now  ask
yourself,   "Do  I  believe  that  white  supremacist  election  law
officials  in  the  South  should  have  the  right  to  confront  and
cross-examine  Negro  complainants  who  accuse  them  of  vio-
lating  the  election  laws?"   That's  the  question  the  Court  had
to  answer  last  week  in  two  Louisiana  suits  to  enjoin  the  Civil
Rights  Commission  from  holding  hearings  because  it  refused
to  let  accused  election  registrars  and  others  confront  and  cross-
examine  their  Negro  accusers.   The  Court  split  7-to-2.   Chief
Justice   Warren   and   the   majority  upheld   the   Commission.
Justice  Douglas,   with  Black,   dissented.
The  Court handed  down  four  separate  opinions.   Beside  the
Warren   decision  and  the  Douglas-Black   dissent  there  was  a
long  concurring opinion  by Mr.  Justice  Frankfurter  and  a  tart
one  paragraph concurrence  by  Justices  Harlan  and  Clark,  sim-
ply  citing  two  5-to-4  precedents  of  recent  years  in  which  the
Court  held  similarity  but  Warren  and  Brennan  dissented..   We
recommend  a  reading  of  all  four  opinions,  for  the  sheer  intel-
lectual  pleasure  of  it.
In  the  law,  as  in  other  forms  of  statecraft,  how  one  feels
about  the  ends  will  often  determine  one's  attitude  toward  the
means.  To  allow  election  officials  in  the  South  to confront  and
cross-examine  their  accusers  is  to  invite  the  silencing  of  the
1   Q
A  three  judge  panel  (picked  by  lot)  of  Washington,
Bastian  and  Burger  on  the  Court  of  Appeals  for   the
District  of  Columbia  has  upheld  six  First  Amendment
contempt  convictions  (Gojack,  Deutch,  Liveright,  Price,
Shelton  and  Russell)  and  reversed  two  (Mary  Knowles
and  Goldie  E.  Watson)  but  for  want  of  space  we  must
leave  them  for  discussion  next  week.
Negroes.  On  the  other  hand,  to  give  sweeping  powers  to  one
investigating  arm  of  Congress  like  the  Civil  Rights   Commis-
sion  makes  it  harder  to  deny similar powers  to  others  like  the
House  Un-American  Activities  Committee  and  the  Senate  In-
ternal  Security  Committee.
The  majority  which  upheld  the  Barenblatt  and  Uphaus  de-
cisions,   had   little   difficulty   in  supporting  the   Civil   Rights
Commission.   Black  and  Douglas,  on  the  other  hand,  are  try-
ing  to  be  as consistent  on  their  side.   They  say the  Commission
can  take  all  the  testimony  it  likes  but  when  it  "summons   a
person,  accused  under  affidavit  of  having  violated  the   federal
election  law"  it  cannot  withhold  the  rights  of  confrontation
and   cross-examination.
Warren  and  Brennan  joined  the  majority,  however,  on  the
proposition  that  investigations—so  long  as  they  are  engaged
in  finding  facts  for  legislation   rather  than  in  "trying"  indi-
viduals  are not  bound  by the  narrow  rules  of  a  law court. This
has  been  true  historically.   It's   not  an  easy  question.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  27, 1960
Dodd  as the  New  McCarthy  of  the  1960's  A  Little  Slow  on  the  Uptake
(Continued   from   Page   One)
nounced  Cure, the  committee  called  a  brief  recess  as  if  to  give
the  press  time  to  rush  this  revelation  for  the  early  afternoon
editions.     Almost  nostalgically   one  half-expected   when   the
hearing  resumed  to  hear  again  that  gravelly  voice  saying,   "I
hold in my hand...."
A  Drowsy  Inquisitor
In  recent  months,  Senator  Dodd,  who  spent  much  of  his
earlier  life  as  an  FBI  agent,  seemed  bent  on  becoming  a  new
McCarthy.    Over   State  Department   objections   he   made   the
Internal  Security  Subcommittee  a  forum  for  some  of  the  worst
participants  in  the  Batista  regime  to  attack  Fidel  Castro  as  a
Red.   His  own  attacks  on  Cyrus  Eaton,  like  his  recent  speech
on  the  Sane  Nuclear  Policy  Committee,  strengthened   the  im-
pression.   But  watching  him  at  the  Pauling  hearing,  one  won-
dered   whether  he  could   make  the  grade.    This  gray-haired
man  with   the   scholarly   brow   enfeebled   by  a   recent   illness
seemed  a  tool  in  the  hands  of  his  own   staff,  embarrassingly
confused  at  crucial  points  in  his  own  proceeding.    As  the  cli-
max  approached,  Senator  Dodd  asked  Dr.  Pauling  whether  it
wouldn't  be  dangerous  if  Congress  did  not  know  the  names  of
those  who  signed  petitions  to  it.   Dr.  Pauling  said  he  agreed
heartily  but  added  that  the  names of  the  11,021  signers  of  his
famous  petition  to  the  United  Nations   in  1958   advocating  a
cessation  of  testing  had  all  been  made  public.   Senator   Dodd
then  turned  to  his  counsel,  Mr.  Sourwine  and  asked  audibly,
"Then  what  are  we  talking  about?"   There  followed  a  pro-
longed   whispered   colloquy  which  presumably  made  clear   to
the   Senator   that   what   the   subcommittee  wanted   from   Dr.
Pauling  were  the  names  of  those  who  had  sent  in  petitions  to
him  and  the  number  of  signatures  each  of  these  persons  had
gathered.
Mr.   Sourwine  earlier   in  the   session   had  already  said,   "I
have  here  what  purports  to  be  a  complete  list  of  signers  and
the  covering  letter  of  Dr.  Linus  Pauling."   Dr.  Pauling  had
already  admitted  that  both  were  what  they  purported   to  be.
What  Mr.  Sourwine  wanted  of  Dr.  Pauling  were  two  other
lists,  one  of  those  to  whom  he  had  sent  copies  of  his  petitions
in  the  campaign,  and  the  other  of  those  who  had   responded
Jane  Addams,  Too,  Called  A Red
"This  is  just   the   kind  of   authoritarian   act  anyone
may    expect  who  tries  to  fight  for  an  end  to  nuclear
testing  and  a  continuance of  disarmament  negotiations.
Any   woman  who  is   intimidated  by  the  possibility  of
such  McCarthy  like  attacks  should  remember  that  Jane
Addams  met  the  same  fate  with  serenity.   Because  of
her  call  for  international  peace  negotiations,  she   was
called  a  Red, she  was  hounded  by  secret  service  agents,
and   innocent  meetings  at   Hull   House—even   to   hear
music—were   under   police   surveillance   for   subversive
activities."
—Mrs.  Agnes  E.  Meyer  on  the  Pauling  subpoena  in
a   speech   to   the   Women's   International    League    for
Peace  and  Freedom,  June  20.
by  circulating  the  petitions  and  sending  them  back  with  sig-
natures.   Mr.  Sourwine  also  wanted  the  number  of  signatures
with  each  response,  no  doubt  to  single  out  for  some distinction
those  who  had  gathered  the  most.   Dr.  Pauling  agreed  to  give
the  names of  those  to  whom  he  had  written  since  this  was  his
responsibility  but  refused   after   another  recess  and   a  confer-
ence  with  his  lawyer, A.  L.  Wirin,  to  furnish  the  second  list.
Dr.  Pauling  said  his  conscience  would  not  allow  him  to  pro-
tect  himself  "by  sacrificing  the  idealistic  young  people"  who
had   helped   him.   He   said  afterwards  "I   feel   that   if   these
names  were  to  be  given  to  this  subcommittee,  the  hope   for
peace  would  be  dealt  a  severe  blow."    Senator  Dodd  and  the
subcommittee  could  have held  him  in  contempt  for  the  refusal
but  instead he was ordered  to return  August  9 with  the  names.
On  August  9  the  Internal  Security  committee  can  again  test
the  political wind and  decide whether  it wants  to  try  a  head-on
conflict   with   so  famous  a  scientist  on   so  slender   an   issue.
Congress  will  then  be  out  of  session  but  there  is  a  law  which
provides  that  the  Vice  President  as  presiding   officer   of   the
Senate  must  certify  a  contempt  citation  to  the  U.S.  Attorney
if  the  Senate  is  out  of  session.    Whether  the  Republicans  on
the  committee  will  want  to  hand  this  hot  potato to Nixon  just
as  the  campaign  gets  started  remains  to  be  seen.   If  being  for
cessation  of  nuclear  testing  is  somehow  suspect,  the  most  dis-
tinguished  figure  on  the  list  of  the  tainted  is  not  Dr.   Pauling
but  Dwight  Eisenhower.
If   You  Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Long  Envelope,   We'll   Send  A  Free  Copy   of  This  Week's   to  A  Friend
IE   Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ........................................................................................
Street
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
6/27/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  94  (1  jr.)   additional:
(To)   Name   ...............................~.............................~............••
Street   ............................................................................._.......
City    ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement T         Tes  D    No  D
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3,  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   Independent   weekly   published  and  edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  In  the   TJ.  8.;  S8  In  Canada;  »10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED