I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960apr11.pdf

============================================================

Lovestone and His Network,  P.  2
An  Epilogue   to  the  McCarthy-McCarran  Era  Buried  Among  the  Obits,  See  Page  3
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,  NO.  14APRIL  11,  lOiiO
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
There,  in  South  Africa,  But   for  The   Grace  of  God
Fvery  American,  North  and   South,  white  and   black,  may
watch  the  dreadful  unfolding  of  events  in  South  Africa  with
gratitude.   There,  but  for  the  grace  of  Cod,  go  we.   The  di-
mensions  of  our   racial  problem  seem  manageably  small,   the
dimensions  of  our  racial  shame bearable,  when  we  see what  is
happening  in   the  environs  of   Capetown   and  Johannesburg.
There,  writ  large  in  letters  so  incendiary  they  may  set  fire  to
all   Africa    below   the   Sahara,  are   lessons   from   which   we
Americans  may  yet  profit   in  time.   The   first   is  that  racism,
however   perfumed   with  magnolias  or   glorified   by  a   vnor-
trekker    mythos,   inevitably  degenerates    into   Fascism.    The
whips  wielded  by  the  South  African  police  on  striking  Negro
workers  are  leaving  welts  on  the  white  race  everywhere.   All
our   ideals—Judaeo-Christian  religion,  democracy,   freedom •-
are  made to  seem  masks for  savage  exploitation.
White  Racism  Breeds  Black  Racism
The  second  lesson  is  that  white  racism  breeds  black  racism.
The  patient  Luthuli  of  the  African   National   Congress,   who
hoped   that  the  Negro  could  win  the   Afrikaaner   over   to  a
multi-racial  brotherhood,   has  been   pushed   aside  by  the  bitter
Sobukwe  of  the  Pan  Africanist  Congress   with  that  slogan  of
"Africa   for  the  Africans"  which   implies  no   fraternity   with
white  men.   These  extremists  were  strengthened   by  the  mas-
sacre  at  Sharpeville  of  demonstrators   against  the  hated   pass
books,  and  by  the  government's  frightened  suspension  of   the
pass  book   laws,  a  victory  for  the  blacks  which  is  revolution-
ary,  for  the  pass  book  is  not  a  mere  passport.    It  is  the  mech-
anism   of   intimidation  and   servitude,   subjecting   the   black
worker  to  his  white  employer's  whim,  to  police  terror  and  to
forced   labor.   The   burning  of   the   passes   is  an  act  of   self-
emancipation   and   white  South   Africa's   attempt   to   reinstate
passes  is  suicidal folly.
The  third  lesson  for  us  Americans  in  South   Africa's  race
war   is  to  prize  and  to  preserve  while  there  is  yet  time  that
element  of  community between  white  and  black  which  exists
here  but  does  not  exist  in  South   Africa.   No   great   national
myth  binds  together   South   African   white  and   black,   mixed
blood  and  Indian.   There  is  no  sense  of  common  nationhood,
hardly  a  common   tongue.    We   are  fortunate  that   our  own
fellow   citizens   of   color   in  their   struggle   for   full   equality,
appeal  to  common   national  heroes  and  ideals,  to  Lincoln  and
to  the  Declaration;   that  common   chords  of  feeling   bind  us;
that  the  Negro  wants  to  be  integrated,   that  he  wants  to  be
fully  American  with  the  rest  of  us.    This  desire  for  a  multi-
racial  life  can  be  the  foundation  for  national  security  in  the
century  ahead  when  the   colored   peoples  by  sheer   numbers
and  industrialization  will  end  white  hegemony  on  this  planet.
The  American  Negro  asks  only  to  sit  with  us  and  eat  with  us
Everybody  for  Ike  Except   Nixon?
In  last  week's  issue  we  reported  that  Senator  Ken-
nedy  had  been  as  ambiguous  as   Lyndon  Johnson  and
Symington  when  asked  by  the  Washington  Star  (March
27)  whether they  would  honor  a  gentleman's  agreement
on  a  nuclear  test  moratorium entered  into  by  President
Eisenhower.   We  are  happy  to  note  that  the  following
Sunday  (April  3)  on  "Face  the  Nation".  Senator   Ken-
nedy  not  only  took  a  clear  position  but  disclosed  that
"a  few  days  ago"  he  had  written  the  President  to  tell
him   that  he   would   honor   any   moratorium   to  which
Elsenhower  had  agreed.   When  he  was  asked   whether
other  candidates  should  do  likewise,  he  magnanimously
recognized  that  Humphrey's  position  was  already  clear
and  suggested  that  it  would  be  "valuable"  if  the  other
candidates    followed   suit    since    then    the    President
"would  be  completely  free  to  go  ahead  without  any  re-
gard  to  the  problem  of  binding  his   successor."
The  Kennedy  statement  forced  Senators  Johnson  and
Symington  to  say  "me,  too"  next  morning,  though  with
no  great  enthusiasm  and  with  escape  clauses.    The  re-
sult  was  that  overnight  an  issue  which  had  been  Hum-
phrey's  lonely  monopoly  suddenly  became  the  common
position  of  all  four  avowed  Democratic  candidates.   All
four  were  lined  up  behind  the   President.
Now  the  President,  as  everyone   knows,  has  a  Vice
President  and  the  Vice  President  is  a  candidate  to  suc-
ceed  him.    On  nuclear  testing,  as  on  most  issues,  Mr.
Nixon  has  managed  to  maintain  an  extraordinary   si-
lence.    When,  however,  last  Monday  morning  Johnson
and  Symington  lined  up  with  Kennedy  on  testing,  Mr.
Nixon   suddenly  seemed  to   be  the   only   candidate   for
President  who  was  not  backing  Eisenhower!    A.s a  re-
sult,   late   Monday  afternoon,  when   repeated  inquiries
from  newspapermen  had  become  too  embarrassing, Mr.
Nixon's  press  secretary,   Mr.  Herbert   Klein,   issued   a
statement  saying  "of  course,  there  is  no  question"  that
the  Vice  President  would  honor  any  testing  agreement
by   the   President.
Symington  at  least   did  say   "everybody   should  be"
for  banning  nuclear tests.    Lyndon Johnson,  while evad-
ing  any  position  on  testing,  at  least   spoke  out  person-
ally,  saying   that  in  the  absence   of  "extreme  provoca-
tion"  he  would  carry  out   any   commitments  made  by
Mr.  Eisenhower.    Mr.  Nixon  is  the  only  candidate  who
didn't  think  the  subject  important  enough  for  a  direct
quotation,  and  the  chilly   minimal  little  statement  be-
latedly   issued   by   his   press   secretary   gives   no   clue
whatsoever   to  Mr.  Nixon's  views   on  testing.    Rocke-
feller    is   for   resumption   of   testing,   Eisenhower   is
against  it.    Nobody  knows  where  Nixon   stands.
as  a  brother.    He  fights  to  end  the  humiliation  of   apartness.
This  is  the  secret  of  the  wonderful   sit-downs  sweeping   the
South.    Perhaps  African  events  may  lead  our  South  to  meet
that  march  to  equality  with  sobered  mind  and  fraternal  hand.
5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  11,  19UO
Jay  Lovcstone  Uses  the  Labor  Movement  to  Run  An International  Network
Portrait  of the  Ex-Communist  Leader  Who  Molds  AFL-CIO Foreign  Policy
Last  week's  issue  told  of  Aclenauer's  award  of  a  medal
to  George  Meany  of  the  AFL-CIO  and  to  the  latter's  for-
eign   policy  adviser,   ex-Communist  leader  Jay   Lovestone,
as  background  for  the  Conference  on  World  Affairs  they
will  hold  in  New  York  City  April  19-20.    This  conference,
advertised   as  a   meeting   to   give   the   nation    "competent
clarification"  of  the  issues  to  be  dealt  with  at  the  coming
summit  meeting,  will  give  a  platform   only  to  those  who
agree  with  Adenauer's  "hard"  line  and  want  a  stepped  up
arms  race  instead  of  negotiation.    Speakers  will  include
Henry   A.   Kissinger,   the   Rockefeller   brain   truster   and
theoretician   of  "limited"  nuclear   war   and   Gen.  John   B.
Medaris,  recently   retired  chief   of  the  Army  missile  pro-
gram.   Here  we  present  a  portrait  of  Lovestone.
By  Labor   Observer
Jay  Lovestone  holds  no  executive  office;   he  merely  carries
the  modest  appellation   of  a  member  of  the  AFL-CIO  Depart-
ment  of  International   Affairs.    Probably  not  one  trade  union
member  in  a  hundred  has  even  heard  of  his  name.    And  yet
this  mysterious  figure,  keeping   discreetly  in  the  background,
is  the  day-by-day architect  of  American  labor's  foreign  policy
and  the  director  of  its  network   of  agents  abroad.     He  has
never  been  elected  to  a  union  office,  and  could  not  be,  but  he
probably  wields  more  influence  than  many  prominent  union
officials  well  known  to both  their  memberships  and  the  public.
That  a  person  of  his  background   could  have  wormed  his
way  into   this  position   is  remarkable   in   and   of   itself.   Jay
Lovestone  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American  Commu-
nist   Party,   and   its  national   secretary   before   Earl   Browder.
When  Lovestone  got  caught  in  the  Russian   factional   strug-
gles,  he  was  expelled  in  1929.    He  thereupon  set  up  his  own
dissident  Communist   splinter  group  which  continued   in  busi-
ness  until  1941.     The  line  of  the  Lovestone  group  was  that
Stalin  was  doing  a  fine  job  in  Russia,  but  that  his  methods
wouldn't  work  in  America.
Bubinsky  Foe  Becomes  Dubinsky  Protege
After  the  group  dissolved,  Lovestone  got  a  job  as  advisor
to   David   Dubinsky,   head   of   the   Ladies   Garment   Union,
through   Charles  Zimmerman,  president  of  Local  22,  once  a
Dubinsky  foe  and  now  an  International  vice  president  of  the
union.    By the  late  thirties,  Zimmerman  and  his  Lovestoneite
associates  in  control  of  Local  22,  had  made  peace  with  Dubin-
sky,    and   become   his   agents   around   the   labor   movement.
Dubinsky,  a  close  friend  and  ally  of  George  Meany,  persuaded
the  latter  to  take  on  Lovestone   as  his  foreign  policy  expert
when  Meany  assumed   the  AFL  presidency.
Lovestone   is   the   professional   ex-Communist   a   entrance.
Another  Powerful  Lovestoneite
Another    Lovestoneite    ex-Communist   is   Benjamin
Mandel,  Research  Director  of  the  Senate  Internal  Secu-
rity   Committee,   once  business   manager  of   the  Daily
Worker  under  his  party  name  of  Bert  Miller.   Mandel
was  expelled   from  the  party  with  Lovestone  in  1929.
Mandel  became  an  assistant  to  J.  B.  Matthews  in  run-
ning  the  House  Un-American  Activities   Committee  in
1939,  and  left  it  to  go  into  the  State  Department  as  a
"security   officer"  in  1944.    In  1946,  he  returned  to  the
House  Committee,  later  becoming  McCarran's  assistant
on  Internal  Security   in  the  IPR  case   (see   p.   3).
Reuther   to  Talk  for  SANE
The  sharp  divergence  in  policy  between  the  AFL  and
the  CIO  men  in  the   merged  labor  movement  appears
strikingly   in  the  announcement   that   Walter    Reuther,
president  of  the  United  Automobile  Workers  and  vice
president  of  the  AFL-CIO  will  address  the  mass  meet-
ing  which  the  National  Commitee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear
Policy  will  hold  in  New  York's  Madison  Square  Garden
May   19.    Other   speakers   will  be   Eleanor   Roosevelt,
Governor  G.  Mennen  Williams  of  Michigan,  Dr.  Harold
Taylor,   former  president   of  Sarah   Lawrence,   and  A.
Philip  Randolph  of  the   Sleeping   Car  Porters.
The  world  remains  divided  between  black  and  white  as  be-
fore;  the  good  guys  and  bad  guys  have  simply  shifted  posi-
tions.    He  has  brought  to  his  new  role  the  same narrow-mind-
edness,   the   identical  measure  of   dishonesty,  the  unrelieved
bigotry  and  absence  of  scruple,  which  Communism had  origi-
nally  taught  him;  he  has  merely  changed  the  locale  of  his  ac-
tivities.   With  the   AFL-CIO   aligned   in  its  foreign   outlook
with  Truman,  the  China  Lobby  and  the  American  Legion,  it
could  easily  overlook  Lovestone's unsavory past  to  make use of
his  expert  knowledge  of  Communist  techniques, and  his  long
acquaintance  with  Communist  personnel  around  the  world.
Lovestone  is  considered  a  sinister  figure  by  most  who  know
him,   but  no  one  has  accused  him  of  being  a  slouch  on  the  pro-
duction  end  of  a  job.   He  has  performed  impressively  in  or-
ganizing  an  apparatus  of  agents  in  a  score  of  countries.   Love-
stoneite's   gumshoe   men  use  money,   State  Department   influ-
ence  and  variegated  forms  of  persuasion  to  interfere  in   the
affairs   of   foreign  labor  organizations.
The   ex-Lovestoneite  Irving  Brown   is  the  chief   AFL-CIO
representative   in  Europe.    He   deals  with  labor   officials   and
government  personnel   like  a  plenipotentiary  of   a  sovereign
power.   The  ex-Lovestoneite  Harry  Goldberg  works  for  the
Department  of  International  Affairs  and  was  the  International
Confederation  of  Free  Trade  Unions'  pro-consul  in Indonesia
for  a  spell.    The   StaT:e  Department  is  expanding its  program
of  labor attaches, and  as  George  M.  Harrison  recently  boasted,
calls  upon  the  AFL-CIO  to  nominate  the  candidates.   These
originate  out  of   Lovestone's   office.     On   another   front,   the
Lovestone  task  force works  in  close unison  with  Allan  Dulles'
CIA.    Ed  Lahey,  columnist  and  labor  expert  for  the  Knight
chain  of  newspapers,  informs  us  that  the  CIA  "has  in  recent
years  obtained  much  of  its  primary  information  about  inter-
national  Communism  from  Lovestone."*   The  labor  imperial-
ism  of  Lovestone-Meany  has  led  to  a  lot  of  bad  blood   and
blowups   between   American   and   foreign   labor   officials,   but
the  American  unions  foot  a  big  part  of  the  ICFTU  bills;  so
they  cannot  too  easily  be  attacked.   Organized   labor,  accord-
ing  to  the  books,  ought  to  be  on  the  side  of  the  angels.    It  is
.  instead,  in  this  era  of  world  peril,  out-DuIlesing  the  late  un-
lamented  Dulles,  and  has  turned  over  the  conduct  of  its  for-
eign  affairs  to  a  fanatic.   The  main  hope  is that  there  is  grow-
ing  opposition  to  Lovestone  within  the  Executive  Council  on
the  part  of  Reuther  and  some  of  the  other  ex-CIO  heads.
•The  gifted  Lahey,  in  a  lethal  phrase,  said  Lovestone  was
"half   cloak-and-dagger,   half   cloak-and-suiter."—IPS
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  11, 19i,0
Federal  Judge  Dismisses  the  Charges  Against  the  Institute  for  Pacific  Relations
An  Epiloque to  the  McCarthy-McCarran  Era Buried  Among  the  Obits
As  in  the  day's  of  McCarthy's glory,  the  charges  may  make
page   one  headlines  but   the   rebuttals,   if  noticed  at  all,  are
squeezed  into  the  back  pages.   Buried  on  the  obituary  page  of
the  New   York   Times  April  1,  unnoticed  in  most  of  the  na-
tion's  press,  was  news  of  the  first  judicial  appraisal  of  those
charges  against  the  Institute  for   Pacific  Relations which  pro-
vided  first  McCarthy  and  then   McCarran   with  the  material
the)-  used  to   terrorize   the   State  Department,   to   smear  Far
Eastern  experts who  did  not  follow  the  China Lobby  line,  and
to  make  impossible  to  this  day  full  and  sober  public  discus-
sion  of  our  relations with  the  new  China.
Afraid  to  Produce  Witnesses  in  Court?
The   case  was  a  suit  by  the  Institute  to  recover  back  taxes
paid  in  1955  when  its  tax  exemption  was  revoked  by  the  In-
ternal  Revenue Commissioner T.  Coleman  Andrews.  The  lat-
ter  acted  on  the  basis of  the  McCarran  committee  report  which
pictured  the  IPR  as  the  center  of  a  conspiracy which  reached
into  the   State  Department,   subverted   Chiang  Kai-shek  and
connived  at  a  Communist  take-over   in  China.   The   govern-
ment,  in  contesting  the  suit,  put  into  evidence the  14  volumes
of  McCarran  committee  (Senate  Internal  Security)  hearings
on  the  IPR.   The  IPR  challenged  the  government  to  produce
for  cross-examination the  witnesses who  had  appeared  against
the  IPR  before  McCarran,  but  the  government  failed  to  do so.
The  IPR,  represented  by  Charles Kades,  of  Hawkins,  Dela-
field  and  Wood,  submitted  in  evidence  copies  of  all  its pub-
lications  for   1953-55  and  the  proceedings  of  all  its  interna-
tional  conferences since  its  establishment in  1925.   Many dis-
tinguished  witnesses,  among  them  Philip  Jessup  of  Columbia.
Labor's  Far  Eastern  Expert
One  of  McCarran's  witnesses  against  the  Institute of
Pacific   Relations  was  Prof.  David   N.  Rowe  of  Yale.
He  accused  the  IPR  of  engaging  in  "propaganda"  and
called  Owen Lattimore  "probably  the  principal  agent of
Stalinism"    among   Far    Eastern    specialists.      Prof.
Rowe  has  been  chosen  to  be  the  speaker  on  the   Far
East  for  the  coming  AFL-CIO  pre-summit   conference
discussed   on  page  two  of  this  week's  issue.
appeared  on  its behalf.  Judge  David  N.  Edelstein  in  the  Fed-
eral  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York  found  on
March  30 that  the  IPR  had  not  engaged  in  "the dissemination
,  of  controversial  and  partisan  propaganda"   and  had  "made   no
attempt  to  influence the  policies and/or  actions  of  any govern-
ment  or  governmental  officials."    He  issued  an  order  for  re-
covery  of  the  taxes  paid,  and  thus  paved   the  way  for   rein-
statement  of  tax  exemption.   The  government  has  not  yet  de-
cided  whether  to  appeal.
The   McCarthy-McCarran    hearings   ruined   the   careers   of
such  Foreign  Service  "old China  hands"  as  John  Carter  Vin-
cent,  John   Stewart  Service  and  John   Paton   Davies.     It  ef-
fectively  smeared  a  whole  group  of  Far  Eastern  experts  who
like  them  had  been  critical of  Chiang  Kai-shek.   It  subjected
Owen  Lattimore  to  what  he  described  in  a  book  on  his  ex-
periences  as  Ordeal  by  Slander.   But  Lattimore  won  his  battle
when  his  perjury indictment  was dismissed  without  trial.   The
IPR  case  was  the  first  time  the  McCarthy-McCarran  material
had   been   scrutinized  by  a  trial  judge.    Its  rejection  as  un-
founded   deserved  wider   publicity.
Text  of  Decision  in  Favor  of  Institute  of  Pacific  Relations
"The  issue  involved  in  this  case  is  the  nature  of  the  plain-
tiff's  activity  in  the  taxable  year  1955.  The. only  direct  evi-
dence  of what  actually happend  in that  year  was  presented  by
the  plaintiff.    This   evidence  was  totally   uncontradicted  and
utterly  unimpeached  by  the  Government  in  any  direct  way.
The   Government's   case  was   presented   by   indirection.     It
offered  into  evidence  the  report  and  hearings  of  the  McCar-
ran  Internal  Security  Subcommittee  concerning  the  activities
of  the  plaintiff  in  the  years  before  1950, and  attempted  to
establish  their  relevance  to  the  year  1955  by  the  plaintiff's
admission  that  its  purposes,  practices  and  procedures  had not
changed  in  the  intervening  years.    Indeed,  the  plaintiff   not
only  admits,  but  insists,  that  it  has  not  changed.    The Gov-
ernment's   position,   therefore,   becomes  double  edged.    The
plaintiff  can  persuasively  argue  that  it  is  properly  to  be de-
scribed  in  1955  by the  evidence it  presented  in  court  and  that
this  description  is  equally  applicable  to  years  covered  by  the
McCarran  Committee  Report.    There  is  not  in  this  case  the
shadow  of  a  scintilla  of  evidence  to  meet  the  plaintiff's  case
for  the  year  1955  other  than that  which  can  be  dragged  in  by
the  back  door  on  the  flimsy  vehicle  of  what  is  in  effect  no
more  than   the  plaintiff's  plea   of  not  guilty   to  the   ancient
charges  against  it.   Moreover, it  is in this case that  the  plain-
tiff   has  for  the  first  time  had  its  "day in  court"  on  those
charges.   The  Government  has  not  seen  fit  to  join  issue  with
the   plaintiff,   on  this   first   opportunity   for   joinder,   in   any
meaningful  way.   It  may  be  conceded that  evidence  of  opera-
tions  in  prior  years may be relevant.   But  it  is  highly  doubt-
ful  that  evidence  of  remote years  may  be  considered  relevant
in  the  complete  absence  of  evidence  of  any  recent  prior  years,
on  the  basis  merely  of  the  flimsy  linkage  of  the   plaintiff's
unyielding  cry  of  not  guilty  to  charges  which  it  now  for  the
first  time  gets  the  meaningful  opportunity  to  refute.    Never-
theless,  a  pre-trial  denial  of  plaintiff's  motion  for   summary
judgment   was  bottomed  on  the  ground   of  the   admissibility
of  the  report.   It  does  not  appear  that  the  issue  of  relevance
was  argued  to  or  specifically  considered by  the  court,  and  the
earlier  ruling  is  not  necessarily   binding  as  law  of  the   case.
But  because  the  ruling  has  some  theoretical  basis,  I  am  re
:
luctant   to   disturb   it.     Moreover,   the   ruling   is   slightly
strengthened   by  the  fact  that  the  plaintiff's  evidence  neces-
sarily  involves the  earlier  years to  some extent.  Consequently,
although  I  regard  the  ruling  of  the  admissibility  of  the  evi-
dence  as  doubtful,  I  shall  adhere  to  it.
But  if  the  Government  succeeds  in  introducing this  report
into  evidence  essentially  in  reliance  on  the  "no  change"  argu-
ment,  it  succeeds  in  the  same  stroke  in  conveying  its  own
appraisal   of  the  weight  of  that  evidence.   Indeed,  the  Gov-
ernment's   tactics   in  opposing  plaintiff's  suit  speaks  so elo-
quently  about  the  relative  weight  of  the  evidence  as  almost
to  spare  the  court  the  burden  of  weighing  it.   By  leaning  on
the  slender  thread  of  the  "no  change"  argument  and  relying
exclusively  on  the  committee  hearings  and  report,  the  Gov-
ernment  concedes  that  it  cannot  specifically  meet  issues  posed
for  the  later  years  by  the  plaintiff's  case;  and  if  it  cannot
meet  those issues,  refusing  even  the  attempt, the  "ho change"
argument  must  inevitably  be  resolved  in  the  plaintiff's   favor.
The  plaintiff  utilized  its  "day  in  court"  to  make  its  record  in
the  way in which  it  thought  that  record  ought  to  be made,  as
any  plaintiff  in  any  lawsuit  is  allowed  to do."
—U.S. District Judge  David  N.  Edelstein
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. f\  Stone's  Weekly,  April  11, ly/!0
On  the  Witch  Hunt  Front:  Walter's  New  Bills  to  Compel  Informing
J. Edgar Hoover Indicates Wide Range of Civic Groups Now  Being Spied Upon
FBI  Chief  J.  Edgar  Hoover  told  the  House Appropriations
Committee   in  testimony  released   last   week,  "We   now  have
160  known  or  suspected  Communist  front  and  Communist-
infiltrated  organizations  under  investigation."   Since  there  arc
few  real  Communist  front  organizations   left   in  this country,
the   160  must'  include  many   respectable   organizations.    Mr.
Hoover  indicated  as  much  when  he  said  "these  various   fronts
exploit  every  susceptible  segment  of   American  society",   the
"major   targets  for   infiltration  being  Negro,   social   welfare,
political   and  labor  groups."   Obviously  a  wide  range  of  lib-
eral,  civic  and  labor  organizations  are  being  spied  upon.
Back  the  Roosevelt-Thompson  Bill
ACTS  TO  COMPEL  INFORMING:  Congressman  Walter
introduced  companion  bills  last  week  to  bar  from  Federal  em-
ployment  and  from  jobs  in  the  merchant  marine  and  on  the
waterfront  any  persons  who   fail   to  answer  certain  questions
under  oath  before  a  Federal  agency  or  Congressional  commit-
tee.   The  widest  category  of  question  would  concern  "the  par-
ticipation  of   such  individual,  or  any  other  individual,   in  ac-
tivities  conducted   by  or  under  the  direction  of  the Communist
Party  or  any  member  thereof."    Walter   said   the   bills  were
framed   to   deal   with   the  decisions   in   Parker  v.  Lesley   and
Graham  r.  Richmond   which  forbade  the  use  of   faceless  in-
formers  in  Coast  Guard  and  Merchant  Marine  security  screen-
ing.    Both  bills  are  written  as  amendments  to  the   Internal
Security  Act  which  means  that  in  the  Senate  they  would   go
to  the  Internal  Security  Committee.    Eastland  and  Dodd,  its
chairman   and  vice-chairman  respectively,  see  eye  to  eye  with
Walter.  HR  8121,  Walter's  bill  to allow  faceless informers in
government  security  hearings,  is  now  in  Internal  Security  and
may  be  reported  out  at  any  time.    The  bill  passed  the   House
without  opposition  but  Roosevelt   (D.   Cd.)    and   Thompson
(D.   N.f.)    have   introduced  a   counter-measure,  HR   11151.
This  would  amend  the  Administrative Procedures  Act  to pro-
vide  that  it  shall apply  to  all  Federal  loyalty-security  or  indus-
trial  screening  cases.  The  Act  was  fathered  by  Walter  to  pro-
tect  propertied  interests.   The  Roosevelt-Thompson bill  would
extend   its  safeguards   to   loyalty-security   cases,   including  the
Arens  on  Way  Out
Richard  Arens,  staff  director  of  the  Un-American  Ac-
tivities  Committee  for  the  past  14 years,  is  being  forced
out  by  the  adverse   publicity  which  followed  his   expo-
sure  as  a  $3,000-a-year  consultant  for  an  eccentric  New
York   millionaire   trying   to   prove   Negro   inferiority.
Ronald  H.  May,  Washington   correspondent   of  the  York,
Pa.,  Gazette  and  the  Madison,  Wis.,  Capitol-Times,  who
exposed   these   links   (see   the   Weekly,   March  14)   re-
ported   last   Monday  that   Arens  will   take   a  new  job
after  Congress  adjourns.
SF.l'DS  OF   A  FUTURE   DREYFUS   CASE:   In  a  related
field,  Congressman   Meyer  (D.  Vt.)  challenged a  bill  S.  179-5
which  would  allow   boards  of  general   officers   in  the   armed
services  to  determine  whether  any  commissioned  officer   shall
be  required  ''because   his   retention  is  not   clearly   consistent
with   the  interests  of  national  security,   Io  show  cause  for   h'n
retention  on the  active list."   Mr.  Meyer  protested  (March  30)
that   this  seemed   to  him   "in   direct  opposition  to  American
law,  in  which  a  man  is  innocent  until  he  is proven  guilty.   He
should  not  have  to  show  cause  for  his  retention,  those   who
want  to  have  him  leave  should   themselves  show  the   reasons
why  he  should  leave."   Kilday  of  Texas,  floor  manager  of  the
bill,  gave  the  show  away  when  he  said  it  was  framed  "after  a
careful  reading  of  the  latest  decisions  of  the  Supreme   Court
with  respect  to  security  cases."   These  frown  on  faceless  in-
formers.    Since  S.  1795  puts  the  burden  of  proof  on  the  ac-
cused  officer,   he  could  not  demand  that  any  witnesses  against
him  be produced  for  cross-examination.  "I  grant  you,"  Kilday
admitted,  "that  it  [the  bill]  is not  entirely consistent  with  the
principles  of  justice as  we  know  it  in  the  United  States,  that
the  man  is  not  confronted  by  witnesses  and  is  not  granted   the
right  of  cross-examination."   Mr.  Meyer  said  he  thought  it was
"going  pretty  far"  when  a  man  who  "devotes  his  entire  life
to  the  service  of  his  country  does  not  even  have  a  complete
opportunity  to  defend  his  honor."   The  bill  passed  neverthe-
less   without  opposition.    The   House,   like  the   country,  has
long  grown  accustomed   to  the  violation  of  what  were  once
considered  basic  American  principles.
right  to  confront  accusers.
Thanks  for   the   Gift    Snhx   With   Renewals—Help    Us  to  Ri'urh  More  People   With   AVics  Others  Do  /Vol  Print
I.   F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Name    ...........
Street    ............
City      ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
S  Weekly,   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington   15,  D.  C.
N.  W.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
.........................Zone............State........
4/11/60
for  $2 (6  mos.)   or  $i  (1  yr.)  additional:
.........................Zone............State........
gift  announcement?         Yes  D
No'o
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.   C.
Entered  as
Second   Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
Post-dated  Mondays  bat  pub
D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED