I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960feb15.pdf

============================================================

Nuclear  Talks In  Danger, P. 2
More  Campaign  Issues  Democrats  Don't  Talk  About;  Nixon  and  the  SACB,  See  Page  3
/. E  Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  G
FEBRUARY  15,   1960
°'°'       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
15  CENTS
Sensational  Senate  Revelations  the  Press  Failed  to  Report
Atomic  Arms  for  Germany  Via  A  Phoney  Emergency?
A  little  noticed   exchange  on  the  Senate  floor  Feb.   8  indi-
cates  the  government   has  been  getting  ready  to  play  a  very
dangerous  card  in  the  coming  summit   negotiations.    Senator
Gore   (D.   Tenn.)   was  making  another  of   those  speeches  in
which  he  echoes  the  Pentagon-A EC  line that  no  agreement  to
end  testing  underground   is  feasible.    Monroney   (D.   Okla.)
broke  in  to  protest  the  President's  statement  that  he  favored
providing  our   allies  with   nuclear  weapons.     Monroney,   the
first  member  of  the  Senate  to  speak  up  against  this  proposal,
said  nothing  was  more  important  to  our  security  than  to  pre-
vent  "a  proliferation of  countries  having  the  lethal  weapons."
To  this Gore  made  an  astonishing  reply.   "I  would  regret  to
see  such  a  course  of  action  taken,"  he  said,   "but   perhaps  it
Plight  be  well  for  Mr.  Khrushchev  to  know  that  if  he  insists
upon  a Berlin  ultimatum, either  in  the  disarmament  conference
or  in  the  summit  conference,  such  a  course  of  action  might  be
taken  by the  United  States.  A  nuclear armed  Germany  and  the
nuclear  arming  of  powers on  the  periphery  of  the  Soviet  Union
would  be  a  great  provocation.   But  so  are  a  threat  and  an  ulti-
matum  concerning  the  allied  position  in  Berlin."
Easy  Way  to  Torpedo  the  Summit  Talks
What  made  this  the  more  striking  is  that  Gore  had   just
finished  explaining  that  as  a  member  of  the  Joint   Committee
on  Atomic Energy he  had  been  listening  "in  secret  session"  the
day  before   the  President's  remark  to  testimony   on  this  very
matter.   Gore  agreed   with   Monroney   that   there   were   "fore-
boding  implications"   in  such  a  move.   He  admitted  one  danger
"would  be  the  obliteration  of  any  real  hope  for  the  control  of
nuclear  weapons"  and  that  another   would  lie  in  the  provoca-
tive  implications  for  the  Soviet  Union  and  its  satellites  "of  the
nuclear  arming  of  West  Germany  and  the  possibility  of  sup-
plying nuclear  armaments  to Turkey  and Japan." Gore doubted
whether   such  action   "before   the  summit  meeting"   would   be
conducive  to  its  success.   It  would  indeed  torpedo  any  chance
of  agreement,  which   is  what  Bonn  and  the  Pentagon  desire.
The  revelations  made  by Gore  in  replying  to  Monroney  de-
serve  the  closest  attention.   They  indicate  that  the  Administra-
tion  has  been  considering  (1)  using  the  threat  of  a  nuclear
armed  Germany  in  the  corning  Berlin  negotiations  or  (2)   even
giving  such  arms  to  the  Germans  and  perhaps  also  the  Turks
and  Japanese  in  advance   of  the  summit   meeting.   The  wit-
nesses  at  the  secret  session  to  which  Gore  referred   were  Mc-
Cone  of  the  AEC,  Deputy   Secretary  of  Defense   Douglas  and
Under  Secretary  of  State  Merchant.    Furthermore  Gore's  con-
cluding   remarks,   like   the   vaguer   but   anguished   questions
raised  on  the  floor  of  the  House  next  day  by  Chet   Holifield
Covering  Up the  German Angle
The  New  York  Times  said  Feb.  4  in  its  news  story  on
the  President's  press  conference that  the  State  and  De-
fense   Departments  had   been   making  plans   "to   give
complete  atomic weapons only  to  Britain."  This  reflects
official   attempts  to  cover  up  the  plans  to  give  nuclear
weapons   to   the  Germans.
It  is  indicative that  the  London  Times  in  its  leading
editorial  next  day  (Feb.  5)   made  no  reference  whatso-
ever  to  weapons  for  Britain  but  treated  the   President's
remarks  as  an entering  wedge  for  France  and Germany.
It   said  "the  fact  has  to  be  faced"  that  giving  atomic
arms  to  the  Germans  "would  be  unacceptable"  to  most
NATO  members.
The  London  Sunday  Observer  (Feb.  7)  in  a  story  by
its   Defense   Correspondent  said  "The  Government  has
told  the  three  Defense  Departments that  it  does  not  ex-
pect  extra  nuclear  weapons  or  ballistic  missiles  from
the  U.S."  despite  the  Elsenhower  remark  at  press  con-
ference  "and  intends  to  persevere  with  the   development
of  Britain's  own  bombs."
(D.  Ca/.),  a senior  member  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic
Energy,  indicate  that  these   officials   canvassed  with   the   com-
mittee  the  possibility of  using  an  executive order  to  give  Ger-
many   nuclear   arms   without   asking   Congress   to  change   the
Atomic  Energy  Act.
If  such  a  measure  is  necessary,  Holifield  pleaded,  "then  let
the  Congress  debate the  issue so that  the  American  people may
learn  the  dire portent  of  the  step  we take."  Gore  indicated  the
nature  of  the  secret  briefing  by  embarking  on  a  full  legal  dis-
cussion.   He  said  action  by the  President  without  changing  the
Atomic   Energy   Act   (which   forbids  such   a   course)   would
raise  two  questions.   One  was  whether  the  President  could  use
the  "inherent"  powers  of  his   office   "to  follow   one  course  of
action,  when  Congress  has  specifically  considered   the   subject
and  by  legislation  has  provided  an  alternative  procedure."  The
other  was  whether  "regardless  of  any  legislative  prohibitions"
the   President   could   use  these   "inherent"  powers   "when  a
grave  emergency  develops."   Gore  cited  the  Supreme   Court's
decision  in  the  1952  steel  seizure  case  (Youngsloivtt  Sheet  and
Tube   v.  Sawyer,  343  US  579).     All  the  Justices  agreed   that
(in   the  words  of  Clark's   concurring  opinion)    "where   Con-
gress  has  laid  down  specific procedures  to  deal  with  the  type  of
crisis  confronting   the   President,   he  must   follow   those   pro-
cedures."  There  was  no  need  for  Gore  to  argue  the  constitu-
tional  point,  indeed  he  would  hardly  have  taken  time  to  study
the  precedents,  if  the  Administration  had   not  seriously  been
considering  ways  to  short-circuit  Congress  by  a  declaration  of
emergency.   Something  very  dangerous  is  being  cooked   up.
2       i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  15,  1960
But  They  Want  to  Do  It  In  Such  a  Way  As  to  Put  the  Blame  on the  Russians
Pentagon  and  AEC  Looking  for  Formula  to  Upset  Nuclear  Talks
The  plain  truth  about  the  nuclear  test  negotiations   is  that
powerful  forces in  the  U.S.  government  would  like to  end  the
talks  once  and  for  all,  and  with  them  the  hopes  of  a disarma-
ment  agreement.   They  are  casting  about  for  a  formula which
will  upset  the  talks  but  in  such  a  way  that  they  can  put  the
blame  on  the  Russians.  What   they  are  trying  to  formulate
now  is a  proposal  which  they  feel  sure  the  Russians will reject
—that  is  a  plan  which  will  permit  testing  to  continue under-
ground   but  will  still  demand  a  large  measure  of   inspection.
The  military  and  the  AEC  want  to  develop  more  "miniature"
weapons.  . The   further   we  go   along   this  line  the   less   the
chance  of  ever  fighting  a  non-nuclear war.
More  Light  on  That  "Big   Hole"
The  one-day  hearing  held  by  the  Humphrey  subcommittee
Feb.  4  show  where follow-through is  needed.    Except  for  the
Air  Force  seismologist,  Carl  Romney, the  other  three  members
of  our  technical  negotiating  team  at  Geneva  last  Fall  agreed
(1)   that  too  little  has  been  done  to  implement  the  Berkner
panel   recommendations  of  last  March  for   improving  means
of  detecting  underground  blasts  (2)   that  they  were  still  hope-
ful  about  continuing the  talks  and  (3)   that  the  Russian scien-
tists  did  discuss  the  new  data  and  make  a  real  contribution to
its understanding.  Drs.  Fisk  and  Panofsky  also  agreed  that  the
Teller   "big   hole"   theory   for   muffling   underground   bUsts
would   be  very   difficult,   time-consuming  and   expensive  even
if  feasible.  They  said  a  room  as big  as the  hearing  room  a half
mile  underground  could  muffle  a  shot  of  only one-seventieth
of  a kiloton  and  that  it  would  take  a  hole  almost  as  big  as  the
Pentagon  for  a  70 kiloton  blast. That,  today, is a small  weapon.
Questions  They  Should  Have  Asked
It  is  a  pity  questioning  was  not  more  precise.   Of  the  four
Senators  present,  Gore  and  Hickenlooper  ran  interference  for
the  AEC;  the  youthful  Church  of  Idaho  is  as  cautious  as  an
aging  elephant;  only  Humphrey  asked  any  real  questions.
Not  asked:  Why  has there  been  no  estimate of  what  the  im-
21  House  Members  for  Ban  on Testing
A  bloc  of  21  Democratic  Congressmen  are   supporting
a  resolution,  H.  Con.  Res.  573  by  Clem  Miller  (Cal.),  to
extend  the  U.S.   moratorium  on  nuclear  testing  at  least
until  the  end  of  this  year  but  no  Senator   has  yet  been
found  to  join  them.   The  Miller  resolution  says  testing
''adversely  affects  both  human  health  and   psychological
attitudes  conducive  to  peaceful  negotiations";  and  cites
the   U.S.   vote  for  a  UN  resolution  last  Fall  (78-to-O)
for  test  cessation.
Thompson  (N.J.)  Feb.  10  became  the  19th  Congress-
man  to  introduce   an  identical  resolution.    The  others
are  Ashley   (Ohio),   Blatnik    (Minn.),   Burdick   (N.D.),
Flynn  (Wis.),  Foley  (Md.),  Gray   (111.),  Green   (Ore.),
Johnson    (Col.),   Karth   (Minn.),   Kastenmeier    (Wis.),
Kowalski  (Conn.),  Meyer  (Vt.),  Rivers   (Alaska),   Roo-
sevelt  (Cal.),  Wier  (Minn.),  Wolf   (Iowa)  and  Harmon
(Ind.).   Vanik  (Ohio)  agrees  "in  principle"  and  may  do
likewise   next   week.     Porter   (Ore.)   is   supporting   H.
Con.   Res.   573  but  has  a  broader   measure,   H.R.   4295,
which  calls  for  no  testing  as  long  as  other  nations  don't
,,  test.   This  has   been  buried   more   than   a  year   in   the
Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy.
provements  agreed  upon  in  the  new  talks  at  Geneva  would  do
to  the  efficiency  of  the  180-station  system?  Is  it  true that using
arrays  of  100  instead of  10  seismographs  at  each  station  would
bring  the  detection  threshold  down  to  7  or  8  kilotons;  that
putting  seismographs in  deep  holes  would  bring  this  down
even  further?   Congressman  Porter  of  Oregon  was  calling  the
attention  of  the  House  at  press  time  Feb.  10  to  the  fact  that
Russian  delegates  at  the  recent  "foothills"  parliamentary con-
ference  in  London  agreed   to  the  use  of  unmanned  seismo-
graphs  in addition  to  the  180 stations  (as  recommended by  the
Berkner  panel).   This  would  further  improve detection.   Prof.
Jay  Orear  of  Cornell  told  the  London  meeting  U.S.   delegates
had  been  instructed not  to  bring  up  the  question  of  unmanned
stations.   Why?   This  is  a  question  we  hope  the  Humphrey
subcommittee  will  explore  in  further  hearings.
Ignored  by  the  Press:  Three  Who  Spoke  Up  for  Arms Control  in  Senate  Feb. 8
"Forty-one  billion  dollars  or  forty-two   billion  dollars  are
being  poured  into  this  economy  today  for  military   expendi-
tures.   Does  anyone  want  to suggest  this is  a free  economy?
There  is  no free  economy  in  the  U.S.A.  today.  The  economy
of   America   today   is  basically  a  military   economy,  with  a
great   many   businessmen   in  America   subsidized   with   na-
tional  defense  expenditures.   Businessmen  are  the  most   sub-
sidized  group  in  America.    The  business  subsidy  makes  the
subsidy  which  the  farmers  get  look  like  economic  peanuts.
"We  shall  not  have  any  true  prosperity  when  that  pros-
perity  is  built  upon  between  $41  and  $42  billion  of   military
expenditures.  We cannot  eat  the  fruit  of  those  expenditures.
We  cannot  wear  them.   They  do not  house  us.  ...     The sad
feature  is  that  such  expenditures  advance  the  danger  of  the
destruction  of  the  United  States.  .  .  .  The  American  people
need  to  be  awakened  to  the  great  danger  that   confronts
them  as  we,  along  with  Russia,  lead  mankind,  I  fear,  to  its
own  destruction  by  building   up  a  nuclear  arms  race  which
cannot  be  squared  with  a  single   moral   principle  that   we
teach  our  boys  and  girls."
—Senator  Morse   (D.  Ore)
"The   United  States  is  the  only  nuclear  power   which  has
not  accepted   total   and  permanent  disarmament    under   ade-
quate  international  safeguards  as  its  goal. ...  I  think  that
it  is  a  disgrace.   The  British  have  done  it.   The  Russians
have  done  it.   We  have  not  done   it.   If  the  newspaper   ac-
counts  of  the  disarmament   report  furnished  the  President
by  Mr. Coolidge  are'correct,  we  are  not  going  to  do  it  at  the
10-nation    disarmament    conference   convening   in    Geneva
next  month."                                 —Senator  Clark  (D.   Pa.)
"With   a  number   of   my  senatorial  colleagues,  I  was   in
Russia  when  Khrushchov   made  his  proposal  of  total  disarm-
ament   before   the  UN.   Our  reaction  was  the  same:  What
are  we—the  U.S.—going  to  respond?    What   answer  is  the
President  going  to  make  to  this?   If  this  is  a  phony   pro-
posal,  it  should  be  immediately  challenged.  If  it  is  a  sincere
proposal,  we  should  promptly  support  it.  ...    But there  was
a  complete  silence   from   our  administration,   a  completely
negative  attitude. ...  I  think  the  cessation  of  all  nuclear
tests  is  not  an  unattainable  goal.   We  should  strive  for  it,
persist  in  it,  until  we  get   it."
—Senator  Gruening  (D.  Alaska)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   February   15, 1960
Lesson  in  Americanism
"If  I  refuse   employment   to  an  artist  for  any  reason
other  than  his  ability, then  morally,  I  am  using  a  black-
list. ...  I  think  those  who  disagree  with  me  have  as
much  right  to constitutional  guarantees  as  I  have.  .  .  .
I  don't  think the  American  Legion  has  examined  its  own
approach  sufficiently.   You  cannot   praise   the   Constitu-
tion  out  of  one  side  of  your  mouth,  deny  it  out  of   the
other."
—Sidney  Kramer,  producer  of  "On  the  Beach"  and
"The   Defiant   Ones",  defying    an  American   Legion  at-
tack   for   hiring   a  writer,  Nedrick   Young,   who   was
blacklisted  after   criticizing  the  Un-American  Activities
Committee,  New  York   Times,  Feb.  8.
Add  Election  Issues  The  Democrats.Are  Afraid  to  Talk   About
How Nixon and Mundt Tied Their Beloved Red Hunt Into Beautiful  Knots
When  Nixon  and  Mundt  were  on  the  Un-American Activi-
ties  Committee  together  in  the   1940's  they  sponsored  a  bill
fathered  by  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce  requiring  Com-
munists  to  register  with  a  Subversive  Activities Control  Board.
When  Congress  finally  passed  the  Mundt-Nixon  bill  in  1950,
Truman  vetoed  it,  warning that  it  was  unconstitutional.   Con-
gress  passed  the  bill  over  his  veto  to  become the  Internal Secu-
rity  Act.  Now  that  it  heads  for  its  final  test  in  the  Supreme
Court,  the  Nixon-Mundt  handiwork  has  the  government  tied
up  beautifully  in  knots.
This  is the  story  behind  the  order  issued  by  the  Court  Feb.
5  agreeing  to  hear  argument on  the  Internal  Security Act  next
October  but  coupling  it  (over  a  dissent  by Clark)  with  reargu-
ment  on  two  other  appeals  which  for  the  first  time  test  that
provision  of  the  Smith  Act  which  makes  membership  in  the
Communist  Party  a  crime.   The   Court  said  the   issues  were
interrelated.
This  interrelationship  is  a  lovely  legal  tangle.    When  the
Mundt-Nixon  bill  was  being  drafted,  lawyers  as  conservative
as  John  W.  Davis  warned  against  it,  declaring  that  Commu-
nists  could  refuse  to  register,  pleading  their  Fifth  amendment
rights,  since  the  disclosure  of  membership  might  be  used   to
incriminate  them.    So  a   section,   4f,   was  written   into   the
statute saying that no one  could be held guilty of  a crime merely
because  he  was  an  officer  or  member  of  the  Communist Party.
This  may  boomerang  in  the  Smith  Act  membership  cases.
The  defense  argues  that  Section  4f  of  the  Internal  Security
Act  in  effect  repealed  the  membership  provision  of  the  Smith
Act.    If  the  Court  rejects  this  argument  and  upholds  the mem-
bership  convictions,  it  will  have  to  hold  that  Communists can-
not  be  forced  to  disclose  their  membership  under  the  Internal
Security  Act.
On  the  other  hand,  even  if  the  Court  holds  that   member-
ship  alone  is not  a  crime, it  will  still  have  difficulty  in  uphold-
ing  the  registration provisions.  The  disclosure  of  membership
could  still  be  used  as  "a  link  in  a  chain"  of  evidence  to  prose-
cute  for  unlawful  teaching  or  advocacy  under  the  Smith  Act
or  other  anti-Communist  laws.
In  testimony  before  the  Un-American Activities  Committee
during  hearings on  the  Mundt-Nixon  bill,  Truman's  Attorney
General  warned that  Communists could  not  constitutionally  be
forced  to  register  as  long  as  there  were  laws  making  various
forms  of  Communist activity a  crime.  Now  the  prediction may
be  coming  true.  It  will  be  interesting to  see whether  that  At-
torney  General  himself still  feels the  same way about  it.    He  is
now  Supreme Court  Justice Tom  Clark.
Walter  Never  Seems  to  Apply  Loyalty-Security  Standards  to  Rightists
Pusillanimous  is the  word  for  our  Democratic liberals.   H.R.
8121  came  up  on  the  consent  calendar  of  the  House  Feb  2
when  one  objection  could  have  blocked  it.   None  spoke  up.
This  is the  Walter  bill  to  overrule  the  Greene  decision of  last
year  and—as  he  explained  to  the  House—allow  "faceless  in-
former"  evidence  against  several million  workers  employed  on
military  contracts and  subcontracts.  The  bill  also  permits "in-
vestigative  methods"   (see  adjoining  box)   to  be  kept  secret.
Not  one  voice  was heard  in  the  House  demanding debate  be-
fore  permitting the  writing  into  law  of  methods as  un-Ameri-
can as denying people the  right to  face  their  accusers.   The  bill
is  in  the  form  of  an  amendment  to  the  Internal  Security Act
of  1950  so  it  goes  to  the  Senate Internal  Security subcommittee
which  Eastland heads.   There  is  real  danger  that  the  bill  may
slip  through  unless  enough  Senators  hear  from  home  on  this.
An  example  of  the  double  standard  applied  by  Walter  on
security-loyalty  was  the  appearance  before  his Un-American
Committee  Feb.  2 during the  youth  festival  hearings of  a  man
named   Andrew  Ilyinsky   employed  by  the   U.S.  Customs  in
New  York  to  check  on  Communist  propaganda  in  mail  from
abroad,  Ilyinsky,  born  in  Prague  1926  of  White  Russian  par-
ents,   studied  in  Munich  during   the  Nazi   period  and   said
vaguely   he   worked   with   "anti-Communist  groups"   during
World  War  II.   He  was  imprisoned  after  the  war  by the  Rus-
sions  but   escaped,   coming  to  this  country  in  September  of
1957.   Now   he  is  a  government  employe,  in  effect   censoring
Orwellian  Police  Methods
If   we  really  had  an  un-American  committee   which
was  "American"  in  the  traditional  sense,  it  would  be  in-
vestigating    the   shockingly    Orwellian   "big    brother"
police  practices  revealed  by  a  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals  de-
cision  in  the  District  of  Columbia  last  week.  The  Court
upheld  2-to-l   the  conviction  of  some  "bookies"  on  the
basis  of  evidence  obtained  by  new  electronic   eavesdrop-
ping  devices.  The police  and Treasury  agents  inserted  a
needle  or  spike  about  12  inches  long  into  the  brick  wall
of   a  private  home  in  which  bets  were  being   received.
This  touched the  heating  duct  and  transformed  the  duct
into  "a  giant   microphone,  running  through   the   entire
house."   Judge  George  T.  Washington   (a  collateral   de-
scendant)   dissenting   felt   that   the   conviction    should
have  been   reversed   and  the   evidence  so  .obtained   ex-
cluded.   He  said  that  while  technically   this   might  not
have  been  trespass,  the  Government has  no  authority  to
use   such   methods   "and   electronic   eavesdropping   was
surely   not   contemplated  in   common  law   concepts   of
legitimate  police  activity."   He  said  such  methods   were
far  more  dangerous  than  wiretaps  and  could  be  used  as
an  ' instrument  of  political  oppression."   (Silverman  v.
U.S.  Feb.  4.)   The case will  be  appealed  to  the  Supreme
Court.    It   is   revealing   that   Walter,   Eastland   &  Co.
never   seem   to   consider   police   state   practices    "un-
American."
the  mails.   How  do  such  people  get  cleared  so  easily?   And
why  didn't Walter  question  him  about  his  political   past?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,   February  15, 1960
Soustelle  and  deSerigny  Do  Better  With Mobs Than  at  Orderly  Elections
The  One  Clear  and  Simple  Way  to  Guarantee  the  Negro's  Right  to  Vote
Nothing  in   the   Constitution   is  clearer  than   the   right   of
Congress  to  regulate  elections.   Art.  I,  Sec.  IV  says   Congress
"may  at  any time by law  make  01: alter"  the  election  laws  of  the
States  insofar  as  the  choosing  of  Representatives  and  Senators
is  concerned.    Skulduggery  in  elections  may  be  checked  under
Section  V  which  makes  each  house  of  Congress   "the  judge  of
the  elections,  returns  and  qualifications  of  its  own   members."
The  15th  Amendment  gives  Congress  "power  to  enforce  .  .  .
by  appropriate   legislation"   the  provision   that   "the   right  of
citizens  to  vote"  shall  not  be  abridged  "by  any  State  on  ac-
count  of  race,  color  or  previous  condition  of  servitude."    It  is
the  will  which  has  been  lacking.
Neither  the  Rogers  plan  for  voting  referees  to  be appointed
by  the  Courts  nor  the  Civil  Rights  Commission  plan  for  the
appointment   of   temporary   registrars   by   the   President   uses
these  powers  fully.    Either  will put  the  burden  on  Negroes  in
the  hostile  atmosphere  of  the  South  to  engage  in   prolonged
litigation  and  make  them  dependent  on  faltering  courts  and
an  often  indifferent  White  House.   The  simple  way  out  would
be  to  use  the  15th  amendment  to  establish  a  Federal  elections
commission  to  register  voters  and  supervise  voting  in  primary
and  general  elections  for  all  Federal  offices.    This  would  put
white  and  black,  North   and  South,  on  a  footing  of  equality.
Granted  that  this  is politically  impossible  at  the  moment,  why
shouldn't   the   Negro   and   his   friends   campaign   for   a   real
remedy   rather   than   weakly   acquiesce  in   half-loaf  measures
which  won't  pass  Congress  anyway  unless  cut  down  to  even
more  meagre  proportions?
On  the  Ticker-Tape from  the  Capital
•We hope  voters won't  be  too  impressed  by  the  sudden  spate
of  activity  in  the  Senate  designed  to  prove  Lyndon  Johnson  a
liberal.    The  House  will  reduce,  shelve  or  kill  much  of  this
legislation  and  Eisenhower  will  veto  the  rest.    It's  an  election
year  game.    The  clean  elections  bill  is  to  be  forgotten  in  the
House;  Majority  Leader  McCormack   is  getting  ready  to  ait
teachers'  salaries out  of  any  education bill.   Senate  liberals like
Clark,   Hennings   and   McNamara   are   sincere   enough   and
dazzled  by  their  election  year  support  but  don't   expect  much
Remark  of  the  Week
"If  we  can  stand  up  and  be  served,  why  can't  we  sit
down  and  be served?"
—Negro  college  girl  in  the  spreading   racial  sitdown
strikes  at  lunch  counters   in  North   Carolina,   AP   dis-
patch  from   Durham  dated   Feb.  S.
actually  to  be  written into  law.
Nothing  could  be more  ludicrous than  the  solemn  objections
to   Rep.  Adam   Clayton  Powell   as  prospective   chairman  of
House  Education and  Labor  on  the ground  that  he  is a "racist."
He  is.   But  if  racism  were  to  overrule  seniority,  most  of   the
Southern  chairmen in  Congress  would  lose  their  posts.   Powell
is  not  as  racist  as  they  are,  and  poorer  members  of  the  white
race  will  get  a  much  better  break  from  Powell  than  they  did
from  Barden  of  North  Carolina.   We  prefer  "racist"  Powell
to  Uncle  Tom  Negro  Congressmen.
The  firing  of  Jacques  Soustelle  by  de  Gaulle  was  good  news
from  France.   Do  not  overestimate  Soustelle's   real   following
even  in  Algeria.  The  noise  made  by  the  extremists  is  out  of
proportion   to  their  numbers.   The   municipal  and   Senatorial
elections  held  in  Algeria  last  spring  "showed  that   European
right  wing  extremists  had  lost  ground   to  moderate  and  com-
paratively  liberal  elements  in  Algiers,  and  still  more  so  in  the
smaller  towns"   (Keesing's   Contemporary   Archives,  1959,   p.
17,183).  The  Comte  Alain  de  Serigny,  owner  of  the  Fascistic
and  violent Echo  d'Alger,  now  under  arrest,  was  defeated  by a
moderate  for  the  Senatorship  in  Algiers   despite  the  support
of  Soustelle.
Meyer  (D.  Vt.)   blocked  a  bill  to  "lend"  Chiang   Kai-shek
another  U.S.  naval  vessel  when  it  came  up  on  the  consent  cal-
endar  Feb.  2. ...    Holifield  (D.  Cal.)  not  only  refused  to  talk
with  youngsters  about  the  House  Un-American  Committee  but
complained  to  capitol  police  about  them.   .  .  .  The  attack  by
conservative  Bob  Moses   of  New   York   Power   Authority  on
Governor  Rockefeller  for  trying to  freeze  public  power  out  of
the  nuclear  field  should  be  a  lesson  to  soft-headed  pro-Rocke-
feller  liberals.  .  .  .  The  D.  C.  Bar  Association  voted  110-66
Feb.  8  against  faceless  informers  in  passport  hearings.
We  Need   1,000    New  Readers  in  the  Next  Few  Months—Help   Us  By  Sending  A  Gift   Sub  With  Your  Renewal
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name    ........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
2/15/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ..................................................................:.....................
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Yes  D    No  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Entered   as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post  Office
K    stone'fi   Weekly.     Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but   pub-
lished  every  Thursday   except   the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at   iifilS  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
\ii   independent   weekly   published   and   edited    by   .1.   F.   Stone:   Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$r,  in   the    Ti    S.:   *fl   in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.     Air  Mall  rates:  Sin  to   Europe:  $20  to   Israel.   Asia   and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED