I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960jun13.pdf

============================================================

Time  to  Get Rid   of  Mr.  K,  See P.  4
Believe  It  or  Not:  Secretary   Gates   Explains   How  We  Might  "Win"  A  Nuclear  War,  See  Page  3
L F. Stone's   Weekly
VOL.    VTII,  NO.   23
JUNE   13,  1960=•""      WASHINGTON, D.  C.
15  CENTS
On   the   Senate's   U-2   Inquiry,  and  Mr.  K's  Tantrums
Q.  IT hat  do  you  think  of  the  Senate's  U-2  investigation?
A.  It  would  be  unfair,  certainly  before  the  final  report  is
made  by  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  to  call  it  a
white-wash.   A  better term  would be  a  minute-wash,  like  those
into  which  busy  motorists  dash.   Four  top   officials   zipped  in
and  out  in  four  days  for  a  quick  lather.   The  one  who  came
out  best  was  Allan  Dulles  of  CIA  since  nobody  knows  what
he  said,  proving  that  silence is golden,  and  censorship  (if  you
can  get  away with  it)   almost  as  good.
Q.  What  do  you  think   it  proved?
AH You Need to  Push Is A  Button
A.  That  our  government is  a  triumph  of  automation.   You
push   a  button   and   the   huge   machine  keeps   moving  even
though  the  driver  falls  asleep,  or  even  passes  away.   One  of
the  mysteries the  Senate inquiry  failed  to  penetrate  is  who  was
in  charge  of  the  U-2  operation.   Mr.  Herter,  who  is Secretary
of  State,  said  he  had  only  advisory  power.   So  did  Mr.  Gates,
who  is  Secretary  of   Defense.    Mr.   Dulles   leaked   stories  to
favored  newsmen  saying  he  was  ready  to  take  the  blame,  but
none  of  the  versions which describe how  the  U-2  flights  came
to  be stopped  mention Mr.  Dulles.  In  one  version  (Hagerty's)
the  President  gave  the  order  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and
the  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff.    In  another  Mr.
Eisenhower  gave  the  order  to  his  White  House  aide, General
Goodpaster,  while  talking  with  Mr.   Herter  and  Mr.   Gates
after   a  meeting  with  the  super-duper  National  Security  Coun-
cil,   which  is  supposed  to  keep  tabs  on  such  matters  but   (ac-
cording  to  Mr.  Herter)   did  not  discuss  it.   (What  does  the
NSC  discuss?   The  World  Series?)   In  none  of  these versions
does  Mr.  Dulles  figure,  though  this  was  supposed to  be  a  CIA
operation.
Q.  Assuming  that  the  U-2  was  not  operated  by  interloper*
from  outer  space,  who  do  you  think  ran  it?
A. The  Air  Force.   The  Air  Force  was flying reconnaissance
before  the  U-2.   The  chronology  of  the  U-2  as  published  by
Aviation   Week   May  16  indicates  that  the  U-2   development
was  an  Air  Force  development.   NASA  and  CIA  were  used
as  covers  but  Air  Force  pilots  were  assigned  to  man  the  planes.
Air  Force  intelligence  men  had  "liaison"  with  CIA  in  super-
vising  the   spy   flights.   The   mapping  of   Soviet  targets   is  a
major  function  of  Air  Force  Intelligence,  which  seems  to  be
both  highly  competent  and  properly  secretive,  judging  by  its
achievements  in  long-range  detection  of  Soviet  nuclear   tests.
It  is hard  to  believe  that  Air  Force  Intelligence would  be  will-
ing  to  leave  its  target  finding  to  CIA,  an  agency  which  is  re-
garded  in  Washington  as  a  medley  of  much  too  talkative  Ivy
League   dilletantes,   Russian-reading   eggheads    whose   highly
classified  scholarly  studies nobody  but  themselves  seems  to  read
Our   Own  Air   Law  View   of   U-2  Flights
"The    U.S.  has  never  in  fact  recognized  any  top  or
upper  limits  to  its  sovereignty  .  .  .  the  U.S.  has  never
considered   that   it   is   limited  in  the  protection  of   its
security  interests  to  the  air  space  above  our  territory
and  territorial  waters.  For  example, we  have  establish-
ed  coastal air  defense  identification  zones extending  200
and  even  500  miles  from  our  shores  although our  terri-
torial  sea  is  only  three  miles  in breadth."
—Loftus    Backer,   then   The   Legal   Adviser    of   the
Dept.  of  State,  writing  in  the  February   1959  issue  of
"•JAG",  Journal   of  the  Judge  Advocate   General  of   the
Navy,  a  special  issue  devoted  to  a  symposium  an  space
law.  This  was  called  to  our  attention  by  Bernard   B.
Fall,    Associate     Prof,     of    International      Relations,
Harvard    University.
At  that  time  the  U-2  flights  had  been  going  on  for
three years.
and  screwball  adventurers  in  the  field,  some  of  them  castoffs
from  more  choosy  and  less  free-spending intelligence services.
The  U-2  was not  a  cloak-and-dagger  operation.
Q.  Whom  should  the  Senators  have   questioned?
A.  The  men  in  actual  charge  of  the  operation,  both  here
and  in  the  field.   Every  experienced  reporter  knows  you  have
to  get  into  the  bowels of  a  bureaucracy to  know what  is  really
going  on.  The  men  at  the  top  sign  papers,  appear  at  Congres-
sional  hearings,  rush  off  to  cocktail  parties,  see  visitors  who
can't  be  shaken  off  and  pose  with  visiting  Boy  Scout  delega-
tions.  They  (and  we)   are  lucky  if  they have  time  to  glance at
the  newspapers; Mr.  Eisenhower  told  us  recently at  press  that
he  only  reads  them  on  Sunday.    The   U-2   story  broke  on  a
week  day.
Q.  What  are  the  important  gaps  left   by  the  Senate  mresti-
gatlon ?
A.  One  of  the  most  important  is  the  question  of  whether
U-2  flights  were  ever  suspended  in  the  past  for  political rea-
sons.  The  replies  by  Secretary  Gates  proved  as  unsatisfactory
as  those  by  Secretary  Herter   which  we  discussed  last  week.
Three  moratoriums  have  been  mentioned  by  reporters  with ac-
cess  to  official   sources:  the  first  during  the   1956   Suez  crisis
(Chalmers  Roberts,  Washington   Post,  May  27);  the   second
during  Mr.  Khrushchev's  visit  (Hanson  Baldwin,  New   York
Times,  May  30);  the  third,  a  cut-off  before  the  summit  (also
Roberts).    Secretary Gates  didn't  know  of  any moratorium  on
U-2  flights  during  the  Khrushchev  visit  but  added   "I  don't
know   precisely   whether   during   that   period   we   made   any
flights."   Now  Newsweek   reports   (June  13)   that  the  Presi-
dent  had  "personally   suspended  U-2  spy  flights"  several  times
in  the  past.   "One  suspension,"  it  said  "lasted  several  months.
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  IS,  I960
(Continued  from   Page   One)
The  President  had  serious  misgivings  about  the  wisdom  and
safety  of  the  flights,  a  very  highly  placed  source  reveals.  Each
time  CIA  and  Pentagon  persuaded  him  to  change  his  mind."
If  these  highly  placed  sources  can  talk  to  reporters,  why  not
to  Senators ?
How  Macro illan  Handled Aerial  Reconnaissance
Q.  How  did  the  British  handle  these  flights?
A.  In  this  Weekly   (May  23)   I  quoted  a  passage  from  the
debate  in  the  House  of  Commons  May  11  when  a  Laborite
asked  about  a  report  in  that  day's  newspapers  that  the  RAF
had   participated    in  aerial   reconnaissance   "until   12   months
ago"   when  the  Prime  Minister   stopped   them.   The   govern-
ment's  spokesman  refused,  in  line  with  "accepted  practice"  to
discuss  such  matters  in  public.   I  have  since  located  the  press
report  referred  to.   It  was  an  article  by  the  Defense  Reporter
of  the  London  News  Chronicle and  it  said  the  Prime  Minister
had  stopped   such  flights  after  his  visit  to  Moscow  a  year  ago
and  had  now  reiterated   the  order  "on  an  'ignore  it  at  your
peril'  basis."   The  News  Chronicle  said  Macmillan  was  "im-
pressed  by  the  fact  that  this  mission  was  undertaken  without
President  Eisenhower's  knowledge  and  is  determined  that  the
same  thing  shall  not  happen  here."   This  indicates  a  salutary
awareness  of  the  fact  that  military  and  intelligence   subordi-
nates  may  sometimes   act  on  their  own.   This  whole  question
deserved   a  more  searching  examination   by  the   Senate   com-
mittee   if   only  to   inhibit   irresponsible   provocations   in   the
future.
Q.  What  did  you  have  in  mind  when  you  said  the Senators
should  have  questioned  the  men  in  the  field  as well?
A.  All  the  evidence  indicates  the  U-2  was  forced  down  by
some  kind  of  malfunction  before  it  was  hit  by  shrapnel  from
a  r.ocket that  exploded  nearby.  What  caused  this malfunction?
Who  was  responsible  for  making  sure  the  plane  was  in  good
condition?   Sabotage  is  a  distant  possibility,  but  ought  not  to
be  dismissed  out  of  hand  without  investigation.   I  think  Con-
gressman  Pucinski  of  Illinois  was  right  when  he  suggested  in
a  speech  to  the  House  June  3  that  a  joint  committee  "bring
back  to  the  United  States  every  individual  who  had  anything
to  do,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  the  U-2  operation   at  the
base  from  which  Powers  took  off."   He  wasn't  interested  "in
the  self-serving statements"  of  those  at  the  top  "if  for  no  other
reason  than  because  I  fear  that  they  did  not  really  know  what
Always Something  Going On
"Well,  I,  of  course,  knew  of  the  date  of  the  summit
meeting  and  if  I  had  had  a  strong  conviction  about  it,
I  would  have  said  it,  even  though  I  didn't  have  the  re-
sponsibility  for  the  decision.   I  was  in  an  advisory  ca-
pacity,  but  I  believed  that  there  was  really   no  good
time  to   stop  the   collection  of  information.   There  is
always  some international conference  or   something."
—Secretary   Gates   to  Senator   Hickenlooper,   o,t   the
U-2  inquiry,  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com.,  Junv  2.
goes  on  at  the  lowest  echelons."
Q.  What  does  Mr.  Pucinski  suspect?
A.  "It   is  entirely  possible,"   Mr.  Pucinski  told  the   House,
"that  while  pilot  Powers  himself  might  have  been  a  dedicated
servant  of  his  Government,  his  airplane  could  have  very  easily
been  so  rigged  as  to  go  down  at  the  appropriate  time  over
Soviet  territory  and  conveniently  fall  into  Soviet  hands  .  .  .
when  one  of  our  American commercial  planes  goes  down  over
friendly   foreign  territory,  all  of  the  other  agencies   move  in
—the  CA A  [Civilian  Aviation  Administration],   the  FBI  and
the   various   other   agencies—to   ascertain   if   there   was   any
sabotage.   Yet,  I  cannot  see any  record  anywhere of  any  inves-
tigation  being  made  of  the  airbase  from  which  this  U-2  craft
left  to  determine  whether   or  not  there  was  any  evidence  of
collusion  or   carelessness."
Who  Stood  to  Benefit  by  Sabotage?
Q.  Who   stood  to  gain  by  sabotage?
A.  Either  the  Soviet  Union,  which  could  thus  capture  the
plane  and  compromise  future  flights,  or  those  forces  in  our
own  military-intelligence  bureaucracy which  were  opposed  to
relaxation  of  world  tension  and  stand  to  benefit  in  the  shape
of  bigger  appropriations  from  the  Summit breakdown.
Q.  Who  else  benefited   by  the  Summit  collapse?
A.  Adenauer and  the  West  German military.
Q.  What   evidence  is  there  of   that?
A.   I  call  attention  to  an  Associated  Press  dispatch   from
Paris  which  few  papers  seemed  to  use  but  which  was  printed
in  the  York,  Pa..  Gazette  and  Daily  May  20.   It  quoted  "a
high   official   inside  NATO"  as  saying  that  Allied  officials   in
view  of   the  summit  conference  breakdown  planned   to  ease
existing  restrictions  on  German  rearmament,  restrictions  origi-
nally  "designed  to  bar  runaway rearmament."   Five  days  later
That  Pre-Summit  Alert:  Was  It  Prudence,  Provocation  or  Muscle-Flexing?
Senator  MANSFIELD: Now,  at  the  time  you  issued  your
alert  [the  night  before  the  summit  meeting  in  Paris]  .  .  .
did  you have any  information that  Soviet  forces  were  mass-
ing  or mobilizing?
Secretary  of  Defense  GATES:  No,  sir. ...
Senator  HICKENLOOPER:  Do  you  believe  that  in  view
of  the  general  tensions  that  exist  and  the  rather  jingoistic
statements,  let's   say,  that  have  been  emanating  from  the
Kremlin  from  time to  time,  that  it  was  a  beneficial thing  to
do  to  have this  air  alert  as  not  only  a  show  of  strength  but
as  an assurance to  our friends and allies  over  the  world  that
we  had  a  readiness capability?
Secretary  GATES:  I  do.   ...
Senator  AIKEN:  Mr.  Secretary,  at  the  time  you  ordered
the  communications  alert  on  May  15th,  did  you  have  any
apprehension  at  any  time  that  the   Communists  might  be
considering  or  planning  surprise  action  in  any  part  of  the
world?
Secretary  GATES:  No, sir ... I  did not anticipate  a  sur-
prise  attack.   I  didn't  order  that  kind of  alert.  .  .  .
Senator  FULBRIGHT: Do  you  think  that  [alert]  might
have  been  construed  as  a  povocative  act  under  the  circum-
stances  that  then  existed  in  Paris?
Secretary  GATES: No,  sir,  it  was  made after  midnight on
Sunday  night.   It  was  not  intended  nor  was  it  worded as  a
provocative  message.    The  first  word  in  it  was  "quiet"  and
the  last  words  in it  were  "minimum need  to  know"  .  .  .
Senator  FULBRIGHT:  I  didn't  mean  you  intended  it  as
such.    Don't  you  think  reasonable   people  might  have  re-
garded  it  as  a  provocative  act?
Secretary  GATES:  I  think  reasonable  people  would  have
regarded  it  as  a  prudent  act.
—Before   the  U-2  Inquiry,  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  June  2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  IS, 1960
the  UPI  reported from  Bonn  (Washington  Post  May  26)  that
West  Germany  was  stepping  up   its  rearmament  efforts   and
planned  among  other  things  to  build  submarines  three  times
larger  "than  the  restrictions  laid  down  in  postwar agreements
with  the  Western   powers."
Q.  What   could  the  Senate  committee  do  about  this?
Adenauer's  Key  Role
A,  The  U-2  incident  must  be  seen  in  perspective  to  under-
stand  why  it  proved  so  fatal  to  the  summit conference.    Ever
since  the  Macmillan  visit  to  Moscow,  Adenauer  has  done  his
best  to  shut  every  door  the  British  Prime  Minister  opened  on
possibly  fruitful   areas  of   negotiation.    Every  suggestion   for
disengagement,   for   the   thinning  out   of   troops   in   Central
Europe,  has  been  turned  down  by  Adenauer  because  it  would
be  an  obstacle  to  unrestricted  German  rearmament.   The  most
fruitful  recent  idea  was for  a  deal whereby  the  Russians  would
withdraw  their  demands  on  Berlin  if  we  would  limit  German
rearmament,  particularly  in  regard  to  nuclear  weapons.    This
was  reported  in  considerable  detail  by B.  J.  Cutler  of  the  New
York  Herald-Tribune  in  a  dispatch  from  Paris  dated  April  9
(Washington    Post,  April   10).    Mr.   Cutler   said   Chancellor
Adenauer  "would  certainly  regard"  any  attempt  to  freeze  the
Bundeswehr   forces   as   "discrimination   against   his   country,
which he has long opposed."
Q.  What   was  Adenauer's  pre-summit  strategy?
A.  To  harden  the  American  attitude  to  the  point  where  we
would   deny  Mr.   Khrushchov   even   the   face-saving   interim
agreement  on  Berlin  he  may  have  needed  to  satisfy  his  critics
in  the  Kremlin.   The  Germans,  like  our  military,  prefer  to see
the  "hards"  back  in  power  in  Moscow  because  that  would  end
the  "danger"  of  relaxation  of  tension.   The  U-2  incident  was
a  godsend  from  this  point  of  view  and  it  is  significant  that
West  Germany's  is the  one  government  involved  which has not
taken  steps  to  stop  such  flights  in  the  future.     According  to
the  Gates  testimony,  Wiesbaden,   Germany,  was  one  of   the
five  airports  used  by  the  U-2.   A  dispatch  from  Bonn  in  the
Esprit  de  Corps
Senator   MORSE  argued  that  we  ought  to  make  it
clear  that  there would  be  no  more U-2  flights  in  view of
the  Russian threats to  bomb  the  bases  from  which  they
came;   speculated  that  this   threat   might   reflect   the
views  of  a Russian "preventive war  group"; said  we  are
dealing  in  Russia  with  "amoral"  military  leaders   [as
contrasted  with the  devout  in  our  own Pentagon?]; and
suggested  that  "a group of  desperadoes  such  as  I  think
the   Russian  military   leaders  are  .  .  .  might  start  a
nuclear  war  for  lack  of  appreciation  for  the  value  of
human  life."
Secretary  GATES,  gallantly:  "But  basically  military
men  are  conservative,  worldwide,  and basically  are  well
informed  in  military  matters,  and  therefore   the  mili-
tary  in  the  Soviet  Union  know better  than  the  political
leaders   that   they   will   be  lost   and  slaughtered  and
devastated  in a  nuclear  war."
—At   the  Senate's   U-&  Inquiry,  June  2.
Baltimore  Sun  June   3  about   the  West   German   refusal   to
answer  a  protest  from  Moscow   said  Bonn   "holds  the   view,
though  it  is not  broadcast,  that  the  troop  stationing  agreement
between  the  U.S.  and  West  Germany  gives  the  U.S.  the  right
to  conduct on  or  from  West  German  soil  whatever   maneuvers
it  deems  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  West."   That  is  de-
liberately  provocative.
Strategic  Missiles  for  the  Reich
Q.   What   do   you   see  as  the   objective   of   West   German
policy?
A.  To  increase tension  to  the  point  where  its  new  Army can
acquire  weapons  which  will  enable  it  to  act  independently  of
NATO  and   therefore  to   deal   independently   from   its  own
"situation  of  strength"  with  Russia.   As  this  is  written  a  dis-
patch  from  Bonn  in  the  New  York   Times  June  8  says  West
Germany's  Defense  Minister  Franz  Josef   Strauss  left  for   the
United  States  "to  look  into  the  prospects   of  acquiring  long-
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
Gates  Sure  We  Can  Win  A  Nuclear  War   If   We  Get  That  "Equation"  Right
Senator   MORSE:  The  President  the  other  night  in  his
speech  to  the  nation  indicated  very  clearly  that  a  nuclear
war  would  produce devastation upon  all  participants.  Going
back  to  my  hypothetical question, assuming  that  we  should
fly  a  spy  plane  out  of  some  foreign  base  and assuming  that
the   Russian  Air   Marshal   makes  good   on  his   threat  and
strikes that  air base with Russian  missiles  and starts  a  gen-
eral  war, do  you  think  we  could win  it?
Secretary  GATES: Yes,  sir.
Senator  MORSE:  You  think  we  could  destroy  Russia  and
have  enough  of  the  United  States  left  so  that  we  could  re-
main  a power?
Secretary  GATES: Yes,  sir,  because  in this  case  he would,
initiating  this  attack,  give  considerable  warning  to  our  re-
taliatory  forces  and  with  that  warning,  we  would  move  in.
Senator   MORSE:  Your  view,   then,   is   that   the  United
States  could  win  a  nuclear  war?
Secretary   GATES:   If   it   started   under   those   circum-
stances.
Senator  MORSE:  Do  you  think  that  the  Russian  military
are  aware  of  the  fact  that  we  could  win  a  nuclear  war  if
they  started  that  war  simply  by  sending  a  missile   to  one
air  base  from  which  a  spy  plane  might  fly?
Secretary  GATES:  I  think  they  are  well  aware  of  it.
Senator  MORSE:  Do  you  think,  then,  that  if  he  kept  his
threat  of  sending  a missile  to  a  foreign  air base  from which
a  spy  plane  might  be  flown,  he  probably  would  go  much
further   than  that  and  send  missiles   elsewhere,   and  if   he
knows  it  is  going  to  lead  to  a  general  war,  start  a  general
war?
Secretary  GATES: I  think  he  would  have  to.
Senator  MORSE:  In  your opinion could we  win  that war?
Secretary  GATES:  Well,  we  could  do what  we  call  in  the
military,  prevail  in  general  war,  but  there  would  be  great
damage  to  the  United  States.
Senator  MORSE:  There  would be  terrific  mutual  destruc-
tion  in  a  general  war?
Secretary  GATES:  Yes,  terrific  damage.
Senator   MORSE:  Therefore—
Secretary  GATES:  But  everything  depends,  Senator,  on a
lot  of  factors.    If  you  vary  any  part  of  the  equation,  you
vary  the  answer.    In  other  words,  time  of  warning,  reli-
ability  of  missiles,  ability  to  fire  a  salvo  of  missiles  world-
wide  against  deployed  and  U.S.  forces  at  home  and  abroad.
These   factors   and  the   accuracies   of   these   weapons—any
other  piece  of  this  equation  varies  the  answer.
—Before   the Senate  Foreign Relations  Committee,  June  S.
9 '
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  13, 1960
Russia's  Promising  New  Arms  Plan  Buried  in  Mr.  K's  Clowning
{Continued  from   Page   Three)
range   strategic  missiles."    Long-range   strategic   missiles   are
prime  weapons  of  offense  and  would  give  Bonn  the  power  to
threaten  destruction  of  Russia  and  to  initiate  World  War   III
independently  of  our  wishes.  Such  weapons  would  enormously
enhance   Germany's  power  to  blackmail  both  sides,   wringing
new  concessions  from  the  West  on  the  threat  of  a  new  deal
with  Moscow,  and  with  military power  enough  to  buy  a  new
Russo-German   alliance—as   Hitler   did—at   the   expense   of
Poland.  One  must never  forget  that  the  basic aim of  Adenauer
policy  is  to  restore  the  1937  boundaries.
Good  Advice   From  Lyndon
Q.  Do  you  think   Khrushchov   is  acting  wisely  in  this  situa-
tion?
A.  No.     I'm   no  admirer  of  Lyndon   Johnson   but  he  had
some  good  advice  for  the  Soviet  Premier  in  a  speech  he  made
in  the  Senate  June  3.    "It  is  the  custom  of  those  skilled  in
statecraft,"  said  the  Senator,  reflecting  his  own  rich   experience
as  a  politician,  "to  avoid  unforgivable  words  and  irretrievable
acts."   Mr.  Khrushchov,  as he  showed  in  East  Berlin,  is  avoid-
ing  the  latter  but  not  the  former.   He  is  acting  without  the
dignity  the  head  of  a  great  state  should  show  and  without  the
caution  the  precarious  state  of  the  world  demands.   What  he
says  of  Mr.  Eisenhower is  largely  true, but  he  is  saying  it  with
a  violence  and  vulgarity which  makes  future  negotiation  more
difficult  even  with  his  successor  and   he  is  making  it   difficult
for  Americans to  wage  a  debate  on  the  subject.  The  events  of
the  past  few  weeks  have  revealed  an  appalling   incompetence
at  the  top  echelons  of  our  government,  which  seems  to  be  run
by  second  and  third  raters,  and  these  events  have  also  seri-
ously  undermined .confidence  in  our  government's  spokesmen.
The   restoration  of   faith   in  their  word  should   be  the  prime
task  of  a  new  Administration but  how  discuss  these  matters
calmly  when  Mr.  K.  carries on  as  he  does?
Q.  Maybe  it's time  for  a  change  in  the  Kremlin?
A.  The  Russians  say they still want  a  nuclear  test agreement:
Nuclear  Tests  May  Be  Resumed  Secretly
"Washington  prepares  to  revive  nuclear  arms  tests  if
Geneva   talks  break   down.   Test   ban  negotiations   re'
sunie  today.   Herter  aids  are   hopeful   but  are  sure  of
nothing.    If   Russia   torpedoes   chances   for    agreement,
new   weapons   tests  could  start   within   months,   either
openly  or  disguised  as  detection  research.   [Emphasis
added.]   Nevada  sites  are  ready  now.   Military  men  are
eager  to  check  safety,   effectiveness   of  Polaris,  Minute-
man  missile   warheads.
"Any   blasts   would   be   small,   underground.     There
would   be   no   fallout   to   arouse   public   concern.  U.S.
scientists  believe  Russia  couldn't  tell  whether  explosions
or  earthquakes  caused   resultant   shock   waves.    Ameri-
cans   insist   international   detection   research  blast  sal-
ready  planned  won't  involve  weapons.   But  they   concede
a   military  by-product   is   possible—progress  on  'clean'
small  weapons  for  battlfield use."
—Washington  Wire,  Wall  St.  Journal,  May  27.
this  demands  confidence and  delicate  negotiations.    How  can
they  be  achieved  in  this  atmosphere ?  They  have  just  presented
a  new  disarmament program  that  offers  impressive  possibilities
for   lifting  mutual fears  from  the  world.   It  has  been  blanket-
ed   by  Mr.   Khrushchev's   clowning   and   vituperation   at   his
Moscow  press  conference.   They  dwell  on  the  dangers  of  nu-
clear  war, but  talk with  amazing irresponsibility of  unleashing
rockets  against  any  future   flights,   brushing  over  the   possi-
bilities  of  error,  the  difficulties  of  identifying just  what   bases
they  came  from,  the  price  this  would  exact.   Neither   a  new
U-2  nor  West  Berlin nor  any other  question  in the  world  today
is  worth  mutual  extinction.   Yet  Khrushchov  and  Malinovsky
begin  to  sound  as wacky about  war  as  the  Chinese   Communist
leaders  and  some  of  our  own  Pentagon  strategists.   (See.Gate's
testimony  in  the  box  at  the  bottom  of  page  three.)    We   think
it  the  duty  of  world  statesmen  to  talk  softly   in  this   powder
magazine  our  planet  has  become.   Mr.  Khrushchov  for  all  his
gifts  is too much  the  primitive  for  this  delicate situation. We'd
like  .to  see him  retired for  a wiser  man.           Noon,  June  8.
f.   F.  Stone'
Please  renew
Street    ............
City     ..............
Enter  gift  sub
(To)   Name  ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
9  Weekly,  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
(or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
for   $2  (6  mos.) or
Zone
State
6/18/80
$4  (1 yr.) additional:
....... ...State........
gift  announcement?          Yes  D
No  D
If   You  Send  A  Stamped  Self-Addressed    Long  Envelope,   We'll  Send  A  Free  Copy   of  This  Week's   to  A  Friend
I. E  Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave., N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class  Matter   tt    Washington,  D.  C.,  under  tne  Act  of  March   »,  1878.  Post-dated  Monday*  (rat pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December   at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  16  I)   C
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation   Manager.   Bather  M.  Stone.    Subscription-'     '    '
If   in  the   U.  8.:  $6   In  Canada:  110  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  115  to  Enrope:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED