I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960mar07.pdf

============================================================

How  the  Un-Ams  Grilled Sharp,  P.  2
New   Appointee  to  AEC  Thinks  Alarm  Over  Fallout   Unfounded,  Favors  New  Tests,  See  P.  3
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   VIII,  NO.  9
MARCH  7,  1960
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Balancing  Away  the  Fifth   Amendment,  Too?
The   Supreme  Court   has   chosen   an   ill-timed   moment   to
throw   new   victims   to   the   House   Un-American   Activities
Committee.   The   lost   appeals  of   the   two   social   workers   in
Nelson   and   Globe   v.   California    come  just  when   Chairman
Walter  and  his  colleagues,  by  attacking the  National   Council
of  Churches  in  the  affair   of  the  Air  Force  manual   (see   page
2),    have   been   demonstrating   how   closely   their   activities
duplicate  McCarthy's.    The  implication that  the  armed  forces
are  soft  on  communism,  and  our  country's  largest   Protestant
organization  suspect  for  subversion,  seems  a  replay  of  the  Mc-
Carthy  era.    At  such  a  time,  when  the  menace  of  the   Com-
mittee,  its  ignorance  and  arrogance,  are  clearer  than  ever,  the
Supreme  Court  has  in  effect   reversed  the  Slochowet  decision,
reducing   the   area   of   protection    afforded   witnesses   by   the
Fifth  amendment.
Enriching  the Literature of  Sophistry
In  Slochower   four  years  ago,   Mr.  Justice  Clark  said  in  a
5-to-4   decision   (with   Harlan,   Reed,   Burton   and    Minton
dissenting)  that  the privilege against  self-incrimination  "would
be  reduced  to  a  hollow  mockery"  if  regarded   as  a  confession
of  guilt  and  made  the  basis  for  discharge.    Now   in  the  case
of   Arthur   Globe    (with   Black,  Douglas   and   Brennan   dis-
senting;   Warren   abstaining),   Mr.   Justice   Clark   says   Globe
was  fired  not  for  taking  the  Fifth  but  for   "insubordination,"
since  he  had  been  instructed by  Los  Angeles  authorities  under
State  law  to  answer  questions  asked  him  by  the   Committee.
This  deserves  a  place  in  the  primers  of   logic.    You  cannot
fire  a  man  for  taking  the  Fifth  but  you  can  fire  him  for  dis-
obeying  an  order  not  to  take  the  Fifth!    No  matter  how  you
slice  it  this  still  comes  out  as  punishing   a  man   for   using  a
privilege  given  him  by  the  Constitution.     It  is  another   step
in   the   whittling   away   process   begun   in   1958   when   two
Justices   who   had   dissented   in   Slochower   won   Clark   and
Frankfurter   to  their  side  with  ingenious  subterfuges  for  cir-
cumventing   that   decision,  and   tipped   the   Court   5-to-4   the
other   way.    Mr.   Justice  Harlan   in  Lerner  v.   Casey   upheld
the  dismissal of  a New  York  subway guard  on  the  ground  that
while  he  had  a  right  to  take  the  Fifth  this  showed   "lack  of
candor."    Similarly  Mr.  Justice  Burton  in  Beilan  v.  Board  of
Education    upheld    the   dismissal   of   a   Philadelphia    school
teacher  on  the  ground   that  taking  the  Fifth  proved   "incom-
petency"  as  a  teacher.    These  holdings   enrich  the  literature
of  sophistry.
In   the   Slochower   case,   Mr.   Justice   Clark   began   with   a
statement  of  the  Frankfurter   "balancing"  theory.    The  prob-
lem,  Clark  said,  lay  in  "balancing  the  State's   interest   in  the
loyalty  of  those  in  its  service"  against  the   "traditional   safe-
guards  of  individual  rights."    He  decided   that   Prof.   Harry
Slochower's  invocation  of  the  Fifth  Amendment  was not  prop-
er  grounds  for  discharge   because  the  questions   asked  him  by
3  *
Somebody's  Been  Peeping  in  the
Kremlin  Archives
"You    say   there  has   been  no  establishment  in   this
country  of  subversive activities when our  atomic  secrets
were  stolen  and now rest  in  the  archives  of  the  Kremlin
because  of  subversives  in government?"
—Question   put    to   Mr,   Arthur   Glove   by   Scherer
(R.   Ohio)  in  the  1956  Los  Angeles   Un-American    Ac-
tivities   hearing   which  led  to  his    discharge.
the   Senate  Internal   Security  Committee   bore   no   relation   to
his  duties'as  a  teacher  and   because  his  membership  in   the
Communist   party   12  years  earlier   had   long   been    disclosed
to  the  New  York  City  Board  of  Education.    The  facts  in  the
case  of   the   Los  Angeles   social  workers  remarkably   parallel
those  of  Slochower.     California,  like  New   York   City,  has  a
law  making   refusal   to  answer,  grounds   for   dismissal   from
public  employment.    The  questions  asked  the  social  workers
by   the   Un-American  Activities  Committee   bore  no   relation
to  their  duties.    The   dark  spots  in  their  political  past   were
known  to  their  employers.    They  had  been   investigated,  had
taken   loyalty  oaths   and   could   have   been   prosecuted   if   the
House   Committee   had   any   new   evidence.     Their   hearing,
like  Slochower's,  sensationally  exploited   the   rehash   of   stale
material   in  a  context  where  witnesses  may  have  feared  that
if  they  did  not  take  the  Fifth  on  all  political  questions  they
might  be  held  to  have  waived  their  privilege  and  been  called
upon  to  name  others.     A  careful   review  of  the  record  indi-
cates  that  Mr.   Globe's  skeleton-in-the-closet  was   association
with  the  John  Reed  Club  (misspelt  John  Reid  in  the   Court's
opinion  as  in  the  Committee  records)   when   he  was  in  col-
lege.     Mr.   Nelson's   was  membership  in  the   United   Public
Workers   from   1942  to  1944.*    Neither  is  exactly  a  crime.
Balancing  or  Appeasing?
These   cases   illustrate  the   unpredictable   mysteries  of   the
"balancing"    process.    Why,   when   the   facts   were   so   alike,
did   the  shifting  majority  balance  the   scales  so  differently   in
1960   from   1956?    What  were  the  Justices,   in  fact,   balanc-
ing?    No   question   of   security   was  involved  for   California.
On   a  genuine   balance,   the   country's   need   for   curbing   the
Committee  outweighs  risks  far  more  real  than  those  disclosed
in  these  new  appeals.    Were  Frankfurter,  Harlan  and   Clark
really  balancing  their  own  conception  of  what  is  politic,  their
desire   to   appease   rightist   critics  of   the   Court,   against   the
urgent  necessity  to  stop  the  steady  erosion  of   Constitutional
safeguards ?
*  If  this  case   had  not  come  up  from   California  and  had
Warren   participated,  Nelson   would  have   won   since   in   his
case—he  had  permanent  while  Globe  had  only  a  temporary
employment  status—the  Court  split  4-tor4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  7, 1960
Incomplete  Count  Shows  Thousands,  Not  Hundreds,  of  Church  Affiliations  With  Reds
Glimpses  of Air  Force  Secretary  Sharp  on  the  Un-American  Griddle
Mr.    [Richard]   ARENS    [Staff    Director    Un-Amer.   Act.
Com.].    Mr.   Secretary,  when   you  issued  your  press   release
repudiating   the   publication   as   representing   the   Air   Farce
views,  and   issued  your  apology   to  the  National  Council  of
Churches  of  Christ  in  the  USA,  did  you  by  that  act  mean  to
convey  the  impression  that  the  Air  Force  was  convinced  that
the   National   Council   of   Churches   was   not   infiltrated   by
fellow-travellers ?
Secretary  [of  the  Air  Force  Dudley  C]  SHARP.    No.    I
did  not  intend  any  concurrence  with  this  statement,  or  objec-
tion  to  the  statement  as  to  its  validity.    I  felt   simply  that
this  kind  of  statement  should  not  be  made  in  an  Air   Force
publication.  .  .  .
Mr.  ARENSr    Did  you,  in  your  statement  of  repudiation,
intend  a  repudiation  of  the  integrity, validity  or  accuracy  of
the  testimony before  the  Committee  on  Un-American Activi-
ties  which  is  quoted   in  this  manuel?
Secretary  SHARP.    No  sir    ...
Walter  Guilty  of  Understating  Red Menace
Mr.   ARENS.    Chairman   [Walter]   issued   a  statement   to
the   effect   that   the   leadership   of   the   National   Council  of
Churches  had  hundreds  or  at  least  over  100  affiliations  with
Communist   fronts  ••and   causes.     Since  then   we   have  made
careful    but   yet   incomplete  checks,   and    it   is   a    complete
understatement.
Thus   far   of   the   leadership   of   the   National   Council   of
Churches   we   have   found   over   100   persons   in   leadership
capacity  with  either  Communist  front  records  or  records  of
service  to  Communist  causes.    The   aggregate   affiliations   of
the   leadership,  instead   of   being   in   the   hundreds   as   the
Chairman  first  indicated is  now,  according  to  our  latest  count,
into the thousands, and we have  yet to complete our check  . . .
Mr.  [Donald  L.]  JACKSON  (R.  Cal.).    The  effect  of  the
action  taken  by  the  Air  Force,  Mr.  Secretary, was  to  tell  180
million  people  in  this  country  by  the  retraction  of  this,  that
the Air  Force  did not  believe it    ...
Secretary   SHARP.     Mr.   Jackson,   I   think   it   is  very  un-
lortunate   il   that  is  the  impression  we  gave  .  .  .
A  Black  Eye   for  the  Committee
Mr.  [Clyde]  DOYLR  (D.  Cal.).    My  mail  is  such  that  it
indicates  that  the  work  of   this  Committee   in  the  minds  of
the  people  out  West  that  have  read  the  newspaper  reports—
that  the  work  of  this  committee is  discredited  as  a  result  of
the  unfortunate  apology  and  letter  by  the  Secretary.
The  CHAIRMAN  [Walter].    You may call  it   unfortunate.
I  call  it  stupid  .  .  .
Mr.  [Edwin  E.]  WILLIS  (D.  La.).    It  is  a  black  eye on.
this  committee  .  . .
Secretary   SHARP.      We    certainly   did    not    intend   any
aspersions  on  this  Committee  .  .  .
Good  for  the   Minds  of  Our  Youngsters
The   CHAIRMAN.     This   does   not   charge   the  National
Council  of  Churches  as  being  a  proscribed  organization  at  all.
It   merely  states   that   the   95   persons   who   served   on   the
project  [for  a  revised  version  of  the  Bible]  which  they  spon-
sored   have   been   affiliated   with   pro-Communist   fronts.-     I
Pious  Suggestion  from  Patriotic  Citizeness
To  the  Editor  of  the  New  York  Times:
Wouldn't  it  be  helpful  if  Representative  Walter  were
to  supply  a  list  of  churches  it  is  safe  to  attend?
Bernice  Chase
—New   York   Times,  Feb.  27.
think  that  is  a  great  example  to  show  a  youngster  .  .  .
Mr.  [Morgan  M.]  MOULDER   (D.  Mo.).   Is  it  your  plan
to  revise  the manuals? ...  In  the  process  of  doing  that, will
you  confer  with  the   Committee  on   Un-American Activities
and  the  Internal  Security Committee  and  the  Attorney  Gener-
al's   office   and   the   FBI   for   any  information  which  you  may
wish  to  use  in  the  Manual?
Secretary  SHARP.    Yes,  sir.    I  would  hope  we  would,  to
be  sure  it  is  authentic  .  .  .
The  CHAIRMAN.     I  am  looking  now  at  an  article  that
appeared  in  the  paper  this  morning  concerning  a   resolution
purportedly  adopted   by  the  General  Board  of   the   National
Council   of   Churches   in   Oklahoma    City.     The    resolution
stated  that  the  Air  Force  had  violated  the  guarantee  of   "the
free  exercise  of  religion"  contained  in  the  First  Amendment.
This  is  the  sort  of  thing  this  "fine"  organization  is  capable
of.    There  is  nothing  in  this  manual,  is  there,  that  indicates
an  interference  with  the  free  exercise  of  religion ?
Scherer  Unmasks  the  True  Purpose
Mr.   SCHERER   [interrupting,   before   the   witness   could
answer—Sharp  never  did  get  a  change  to  answer—IPS].   They
don't   want  freedom   of   religion.    They   want   freedom   of
criticism  .  .  .
Mr.  JACKSON.     Is  any  mention  at  all  going  to  be  made
in  the  new  manual  with  respect   to  the   efforts   of   the  Com-
munist  Party  to  infiltrate  into  church  institutions?
Secretary  SHARP.    I  would  hope  so, yes, sir    ...
Mr.  DOYLE.    I  would  suggest  that  the  new  manual  would
direct  the  attention  of  the  Air  Force  personnel  further  than
to  churches  and  schools.
Mr.  JACKSON.     I  did  not  mean  to  limit  it.
Doyle  Wants  Labor  Unions  Included, Too
Mr.  DOYLE.   Directed  to  all  and  any  organizations,  such
as  labor  unions,  or  others.    Do  not  limit  it  to  churches  and
schools.    That  is  my  suggestion  .  .  .
Mr.  JACKSON.     Is  any  action  contemplated, disciplinary
or  in  reprisal,  against  Mr.   Hyde  who  was  responsible,  as  I
understand,   for  writing  this  material?
Secretary  SHARP.    This  matter  has  not  been  finally  decided
yet.    I  think  that  people  who  do  not  follow  their instructions
—and   it  might  appear  that  Mr.   Hyde  had  not—should   be
certainly  reprimanded,  if  that  is the  case  .  .  .
The   CHAIRMAN.     Let  me  tell  you  something.     If  you
so   much   as   say  "Naughty   boy,"   to   this   group   of   people
who  are far  more expert  than  you are,  it will  blow that  up  out
of  all  proportion.    They  will  have  him  shot  at  sunrise,  figu-
ratively  speaking,  for  telling  the  truth.
Mr.  JACKSON.    Furthermore,  some  sort  of  hell  will break
loose  on  the  floor  of  the  House  of  Representatives  .  . .
—Un-American  Activities  Committee,   Feb.  25.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March  7, 1960
How  and  Why  Round-the-Clock  Senate  Sessions  Pressure  the  North
The   effect   of   the   Senate's   round-the-clock   sessions   is   to
wear  down  the  Northerners  so  that  (1)  enough   Republicans
can  be  persuaded  to  vote  for  cloture  and  (2)   the  civil  rights
liberals  can  be  reconciled  to  accepting  the  weak  House   bill
and   relinquishing  their   effort   to   have  the   Congress   go   on
record  in  support  of  school  desegregation.    Thus  the  round-
the-clock  session  is  tailored  to  the  requirements  of  the   Texas
leadership  which wants  to  inch  forward  only on  voting  rights.
Politically  and  psychologically,  however,  it  seems  to  us  more
important   to   get   a   bill   through    Congress   endorsing   the
Supreme  Court's  school  decision.    That  was  judicial  legisla-
tion,  an  affirmation  of  a  changed  public  policy.    It  is  bad  for
the  country  and  bad  for  the  Court  to  leave  the  latter  in  an
exposed   position   on  this   issue,   to   let   it   carry  the   burden
without  help   from   Congress.
The   decision   by  the   Court   last   Monday   in   the   Terrell
County,   Georgia,   voting   case  overturns   only   the   first   of   a
series  of  legal  hurdles  erected  by  the  South  to  avoid  compli-
ance  with  the  voting  provisions  of  the   1957  civil  rights  act.
This  first  decision  upheld  the  act's  constitutionality as  applied
to  State  officials.    The  Justice  Department   must  now  go  back
and   obtain  a  civil  injunction  against   the  Georgia   registrars.
If   an   injunction  is  obtained   and   the   registrars   resign,   the
question   will  arise  whether   the   injunction   can   be   applied
against   their   successors  and   if   necessary  against   the   State.
Awaiting  argument  before  the   Court   is  a  case  from  Macon
County,   Alabama,  the   Tuskegee   case,   involving   the   latter
On  the  Bogy  of  175  Soviet   Divisions
"An  inescapable  concern  of  Western  Europe  is   the
threat   to  its   security  posed  by   175' Soviet   divisions,
quite  apart   from  Soviet  nuclear  armaments."
—"Acheson   Upholds   Bonn  on  Summit,"   article   by
former   Secretary   of  State,  New   York   Times,  Feb.  29.
"It  is  clearly  high  time  that  the  NATO  authorities
gave   up  using  the  time-honored  figure  of   175   Soviet
divisions   as   a   bogy   for   frightening   their   member
countries.    The  Russians  could  not  man  anything  like
that  number  of  divisions even  on  present  western  esti-
mates  of  Soviet  strengths."
—The    Times    (London)    Editorial,   "Russia's    Man-
power,"  on the unilateral  cuts  in  the Red Army, Jan.  15.
question.     Already  argued   and   awaiting   decision   are   two
companion   cases  from  Louisiana  where   State  registrars   ob-
tained  State  court  injunctions  against  the  Civil  Rights   Com-
mission  when  subpoenaed  by  it.    The  defect  of  the   1957  act
is  that  each  applicant  for   registration   may  have   to   litigate
separately  for  enforcement  of  his  rights.    The   South  is  pre-
paring  for  a  long  and  leisurely  sitdown  on  voting  rights   in
the  courts, and  the  best  answer  by the  Negroes  in  our  opinion
is  the   spreading   sitdown   of   their  own.     In   the   one   party
South,  even  if  the  Negro  gets  the  right  to  vote,  it  might  take
him  a  generation  to  win  the  right  to  sit  and  be  served  at  a
lunch  counter  like  any  normal  human  being.    He  can  win  it
faster   by  non-violent  mass  action.
New  AEC Appointee Thinks Fallout Alarm Unfounded  — Favors New  Tests
The  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  was  set  up  to  be
the   Congressional   watchdog  over   the   Atomic  Energy   Com-
mission.    Since  the  appointment  of  John  A.  McCone  as  AEC
Chairman,  the  Committee  has  evolved   instead  into  a  lapdog,
content  to  approve   whatever  the  AEC  proposes.     We  hope
the  scientific community  will  insist  that  the  Joint   Committee
hold   real  hearings   on  the  new  appointee   to  the   AEC,  and
that  such  organizations  as  the  Federation   of  American  Scien-
tists  and  the  National   Committee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear  Policy
will  ask  to  be  heard.
Robert   E.  Wilson,  former   chairman   of   Standard   Oil   of
Indiana,   the   new   nominee,   is  another   of   those   retired   big
business   men   picked   by  McCone.     He   has   all   the   right
prejudices,   believes   alarm   over   fallout   unfounded,   thinks
resumed   teeing  may  be  necessary   and   is  sure   the   Russians
will  try  to  cheat  (see  box  next  column).
For  this  glimpse  of  his  views  we  are  indebted  to  an  article
by  Dr.  Ralph  Lapp  in  last  September's   issue  of  the  Bulletin
of    the   Atomic   Scientists.     Dr.   Lapp   called   attention   to  a
letter  Mr.  Wilson  had  sent  the  Chicago Daily  News.    In  this
letter   Mr.   Wilson   criticized   the   views   of   as   respected   a
geneticist   as  Dr.   James   F.  Crow,   calling  them    "sensational
and   unfounded."     Before  the   Holifield   committee   hearings
last  May  on  fallout,   Dr.   Crow  had  said  that  if  testing  con-
tinued  at  the  rate  of  the  past  decade   "it   is  likely  that   tens
or  hundreds  of  thousands  or  more  persons  will  be   diseased,
or  deformed,  or  die  prematurely."
Mr.  • Wilson   has   been   a   member   of   the  ' AEC's   General
Advisory  Committee  and  signed  the  report  it  released   as  the
Holifield  hearings  began.   This  report  aroused  Senator  Ander-
Useful   Background   or  the   Right   Prejudices?
"Robert   E.   Wilson,   nominated  by   President   Eisen-
hower  to  be  a  member  of  the  Atomic  Energy Commis-
sion,  should  bring  a  useful  industrial  and  engineering
background  .  .  .  The  AEC  suffers  from  a  considerable
lack   of   confidence   in   its   appraisal  of   the   biological
risks   of   radioactivity.     Incidentally,  the   Joint  Com-
mittee   on  Atomic   Energy  ought   to   be  interested   in
Mr.  Wilson's  views  on  this  point."
—Wash.  Post  edit,  "New  Man  at  the  AEC,"   Feb.  S9.
".  .  .  the  public  concern  over  fallout  is  very  much
exaggerated.   This  public  concern might  indeed be  dan-
gerous  if  it  were  to  prevent  moderate  further  testing
to  improve  our  weapons,  which  the  Russians  will  un-
doubtedly  do  secretly  if  there  isn't  provision  for  very
thorough  inspection."
—Robert   E.   Wilson,   "Fallout   Alarm     Unfounded,"
letter   to  editor,   Chicago  Daily   News,  May   28,  1959.
son's  anger.    The  science  it  embodied  was  that  of  public  re-
lations.     It   contained   statements   designed   to   generate   fal-
lacious   headlines   about   fallout   being   "no   more   dangerous
than  drinking  water"  or  background  radiation  in  areas  where
"human  beings  have  lived  for  many  generations."    The  fal-
lacies   were   skillfully   analyzed   by  Dr.   Lapp   in   that   same
issue  of  the  Bulletin.
The    AEC   has   not    had    an   independent    member  • since
Thomas   E.  Murray   retired.     It   has   never   had   a  biologist
member.    A  thorough  airing  of  Mr.  Wilson's  views  and  the
need  for  some  independent  voice  on  the  AEC  may  at  least
build  up  pressure  for  a  more  impressive  appointment   when
the  next  vacancy   occurs.
3    1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   March   7,  1960
How  the  Univ.  of  California   Can  Correct  That   Unfortunate   Slur  on  the   FBI
Nixon  (With  Ike  and  Notre  Dame)  Against  Student  Loyalty  Disclaimer
Among   other  Developments   No  One  in  His  Right  Mind
Would  Have  Predicted  A  Few  Years  Ago:  Nixon  has  come
out   in   favor   of   repealing   the   "disclaimer"   portion   of   the
loyalty  oath  required  by  the  National  Defense  Education  Act
for  scholarship  applicants.    Nixon  first  put  himself  on  record
in  response  to  a  question  at  the  California  Newspaper  Publish-
ers  convention  in  Los  Angeles  Feb  6.    He  did  so  again Feb.
22  in  reply  to  a  letter  from  the  heads  of  three   Midwestern
universities:  Chancellor   Kimpton  of   the   University  of Chi-
cago,  President  Hancher  of  Iowa  State,  and—another  political
miracle—the  Rev.  Theodore  M.  Hesburgh  of  Notre  Dame.
They  asked  the  Vice  President  to  support   Eisenhower's  posi-
tion   for   repeal   of   the   requirement   that   students   sign   an
affidavit   disclaiming  membership   in  any  subversive  organiza-
tion.     They   made  public  his   reply   Feb.   25  in   Chicago   but
apparently   it  was  not   carried   by  the  wire   services  and   the
only   Eastern  paper   in  which   I  saw  it  was  the   New    York
Herald-Tribune   (Feb.  26).   "It   is  my  opinion,"   the   Vice
President   wrote,  "that  the   affirmative   loyalty  oath  by   itself
covers  the  situation,  making  the  disclaimer  affidavit   unneces-
sary  and,  since  it  is not  a general  requirement  for  all  recipients
of  government  benefits,  unwarranted."    The  prose  style  will
lead  few  people  to  confuse  the  Vice  President  with   Patrick
Henry  but  the  endorsement  is  welcome  nonetheless.
Capital's   First  Public  Meeting  on  Sobell  Case
Another  minor  but  significant  barometric   indicator  was
the  holding  in  Washington,   D.  C,  Feb.  26  of  the   capital's
first  public  meeting  on  the  Sobell   case.    The  chairman  was
David   H.   Scull,   the  courageous   Virginia  printer,   a   Friend,
who  was  held   in  contempt   by  a  State  court  for   refusing  to
answer  questions  put  by  a  legislative  committee   investigating
anti-segregationist   groups,   and   was   vindicated   last   year  by
the  Supreme  Court.    Gerhard   P.  Van  Arkel,  a  distinguished
labor  lawyer,  spoke  on  the  legal   aspects  of  the   Sobell   case.
Raymond   Wilson,   the   respected   executive   secretary  of   the
Friends   Committee  on   National   Legislation,   discussed   the
moral  issues.   Helen  Sobell,  wife  of  the  imprisoned  man,  also
spoke  and   messages   of   support   for   the   executive  clemency
campaign  were  read  from  three  members  of  Congress,  Harmon
Why   Not   Call   Some  Friend   and   Suggest
We  Know  Who  We'd  Vote   for
If   We  Were  A  Cow
"He  [Senator  Kennedy]  told   75  farmers   in  Bloomer
[Wis.]  that  the  American  cow was  the  'foster  mother'
of  the  human  race  and  a  great  asset  to  the  nation."
—New  York   Times,  from  Eau  Claire,  Win.,  Feb.  27.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name   ........................................................................................
Street
City     ........................................Zone............State....................
3/7/60
Enter  gift  sub  for  $2  (6  mos.)  or  $4  (1  yr.)  additional:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ..................................................._.........„............„.........
City ........................................Zone............State....................
Shall  we  send  gift  announcement?          Tes  D    No  D
(D.  Ind.),  Meyer  (D.  Vt.)  and  Blatnik  (D.  Minn.). Ben-
jamin  Ginzburg,  formerly  staff  director  of  the  Hennings  com-
mittee,  sent  an   eloquent   statement  calling   for   commutation
of  sentence  or  other  form  of  release  "to   rectify   a  grave  in-
justice."     This   August,   Sobell  will  have  been  in  prison  ten
years.     The   severity  of   his   30-year  sentence  contrasts  with
the  vagueness  of  the  offense  with  which  he  was  charged,  and
the  thinness  of  the  threads  linking him  with  the  Rosenbergs.
Had  he  been  willing  to  testify  against   them,  he  might   have
escaped  indictment.    Had  he  been  tried  separately,  it  would
have   been   difficult   to   convict  him.  Executive  clemency   is
long   overdue.
One  Way  to  Make  Amends  to  the   FBI
We   hope   Governor  Brown  will  not   be  content   with   the
apology  tendered  the  FBI  by  the  regents  of  the  University  of
California   for  including  in  entrance  examinations  a  question
which   said,  "What   are  the   dangers   to   a   democracy   of   a
national   police   organization,   like   the  FBI, which    operates
secretly  and  is unresponsive  to  public  criticism?"    One  way  to
make  amends  would  be  to  substitute  a  new  question  correcting
the  unfortunate implications  of  the  one  withdrawn.    It  might
read  along  these  lines,  "The   United  States,  while  justly  proud
of   its  Bill  of  Rights,  is  handicapped   in  dealing  with  subver-
sion   by   certain   provisions   which   are   a   little   archaic   for
modern  conditions.    What  are  the  advantages  of  a  national
police  organization,  like  the  FBI, which   operates   in   secret
and  can  keep  the  government   informed   of  dangerous   utter-
ances,  associations  and  thinking?    Illustrate  from  yout   own
school  experience,  citing  disturbing  remarks  you  yourself  have
heard  from  classmates,  and  where  possible,  supplying   names,
addresses  and  thumb  prints."
He  Subscribe  to   the    Weekly?
1. F. Stone's   Weekly
./
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington   15,  D.  C.
Entered  as
Second  Class  Mail
Matter
Washington,  D.  C.
Post   Office
I.   F.   Stone'8   Weekly.    Entered   as   Second   Class   Matter   at   Washington.  D.  C..  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.  Post-dated  Mondays  but  pnb
llahed  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two  Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  3618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W..  Washington  15   D   C
An   Independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription •'
15  In  the   U.  S.;  $8  In  Canada;  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED