I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1960
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1960aug08.pdf

============================================================

Castro  as  The  U.S.  Tito
Nixon  and  Kennedy  in  Demagogic   Accord  on  America's  Most  Urgent  Foreign  Policy  Problem
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  VIII,   NO.  30
AUGUST   8,   1960
101
     WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Both Parties for Welfare  State at Home—Why Not In  Cuba?
On  the  surface,  if  one  took  rhetoric  only  into  account,  the
issues  in  Cuba  and  the  United  States  would  seem  to  be  much
the  same.   The  young men contending  for  the  Presidency here,
like  the  Fidelistas  in  Cuba,  stress  two  issues  in  their  speeches
—freedom   and   economic   growth.   But  while  Cuba   is   gov-
erned  by a group  of  young  men  who  risked  their  lives  to  over-
throw  a  tyranny  and  now  risk  their  futures  on  a  program  de-
signed  to  speed  the  economic  growth  of  Cuba,  the  two  young
men   competing   for   the  White  House  have   never   shown   a
readiness  to  die  for  anything.  Youth  is  supposed  to  be  a  time
of  idealism  and  passion  but  neither  Richard  Nixon  nor   John
Kennedy  has  given  signs  of  caring  deeply  about  anything  but
their  political  advancement.   If  they  ever  head  for  the  moun-
tains,  it  will  only  be  for  vacation.   The  contrast  is  as  strong  on
the   question   of   economic  growth,   which   for   Cuba  literally
means  shoes  for  the  barefoot  but  for  us  seems  to  mean  only
keeping  ahead  of  the  Russians,  perhaps  by  building  three  in-
stead  of  two-car  garages.    While  these   two  young  men   are
supposed   to  be  locked  in  a  fierce  conflict,  the  main  issue of
which  is  a  more  intelligent  handling  of  our  foreign  relations,
their  acceptance  speeches  seemed  alike  in  their incomprehen-
sion  and  belligerency  on  the  subject  of  Cuba  where  (accord-
ing  to  Kennedy)  Communist  influence  "now   festers  some  90
miles  off the  coast  of  Florida"  and  (Nixon)  "whether  it  is  in
Berlin  or  Cuba  .  .  .  Americans will  not  tolerate  being  pushed
around."    Proceeding   from   such   stalwart  first  principles,  it
should  be  easy  to  make  the  complex  problems  of  Cuba  and
agrarian  reform insoluble.
A  Pourboire for  Peru
Both  parties  in  their  platforms  are  forced  to  pay  lip  service
at  least  to  welfare  state  principles  which  most  of  our   press
a  quarter  century  ago  was  denouncing   as  communistic,   and
which  one  unregenerate  wing  of  the  Republican  party  still  re-
gards  as  subversive.   But  neither  the  leaders  nor  the  rank-and-
file  seem  to  have   sufficient   sympathy  and   imagination  to  see
that  the  Cuban  people  under  Fidel  Castro  are  struggling  with
similar  aspirations  against  similar  influences  for  a  belated   New
Deal  of  their  own.   To  one  who  well  remembers  the  exciting
idealism   of   New   Deal   Washington   and   found    the   same
spirit  of  construction   and  devotion  in  Fidel  Castro's  Havana,
it  was appalling  to  come  home  and  to  encounter   such   unkind
and  ungenerous  attitudes  toward  a  less  fortunate,  small  neigh-
boring  country.   If  the  candidates   cannot  do  any  better   than
pander  to  oversimplified  stereotypes   and  stimulate  tough  guy
attitudes  where  patience  is required,  they  may  come  to  seem  in
Latin  America  as  unthinking  and  tactless  as  Eisenhower  who
conferred  the  Legion  of  Merit  on  Peru's  dictator,   Odria,  in
1954  and  now  rewards  Peru  with  a  $53,200,000  loan  a  few
days  after  it  agreed  to  sponsor  the  motion  we  wanted  to  trans-
Not  Only  in Cuba
"Unlike  the  Anglo-Americans, the   Latin  Americans
are  not   the  heirs  of   a   primarily  capitalist  tradition.
Long   schooled  in   the   doctrine  that  certain   economic
activities   must   be  carried   out   and  controlled  by   the
central   government,  they   find   it    difficult    to   accept
the  preachments of  Washington  that  capitalism  is  the
only   means  by   which  they   can  improve  their  living
conditions. ...  If  adequate  private  capital  and  tech-
nology   are   not   made   available  from   outside   Latin
America,  governments,  even  in  those  countries  where
in  the  past  private  efforts  have  played  a  major   role,
may  find  it   necessary   to  establish  and  operate  pro-
ductive   enterprises   themselves.    The  result   may   not,
almost   certainly  will   not,  be   the   adoption  of   Soviet
Communism,  but  it  may  well  take  the  form  of  inten-
sified  social  action  along   nationalist   lines.  .  .  .
"Aid  from  the   good  partner  to  the  north  would  be
welcomed   in   the   form   of   private   capital,   but   such
capital  must  not  seek  to  monopolize  the  resources   of
the  Latin  American  peoples  or claim  a  privileged status
above   the   national  laws.    But   much  of   the   U.S.   in-
sistence   upon  private   onfrepeneitrial   action  is  galling
to  the   Latin  Americans.    They  consider  it   inadequate
fo   meet  their   programs   of   economic   diversification."
—Donald   HI.  Do.-cr:  Arc    TTY Good  Neighbors?    Uniu.
of   Florida  Press.    Prof.   Dn~rr  mis  u  State  Dcpt.    of-
ficin!   on   I.alia   Aiiii-riccm   nffi'ii-s     from    1344   to   JOSS.
1    1      f
fer  the  Cuban  -question  from  the  United  Nations  to  the  Or-
ganization   of   American  States.    To   Latin   Americans,  this
ponrboire  to  Peru  and  these first campaign  statements  on  Cuba
will  seem  again  to  show  a  rich  neighbor's obtuseness.
The  fear  that  Cuba  might  be  turned  into  a  Russian  base  is
natural.   But  the  way  to  meet  this  danger  is  not  to  make  the
Cubans   feel  we  have   no   sympathy  for   their   problems   and
leave  them  no  alternative  but  to  increase  their  dependence  on
the  Soviet  bloc.   After  the  overthrow  of  Machado  in  1933,   the
Foreign  Policy  Association  appointed  a  Commission  on  Cuban
Affairs   which  turned   in  a  report   The  Problems  of  the   New
Cuba  which   still   makes   enlightening   reading.     It  would   be
good  if  an  independent  commission  on  the  eve  of  a  new  Ad-
ministration  could  again  take  a  fresh  look  at  our  Cuban   rela-
tions.   We  know  too  little  of  the  first  few  months  after  Castro
came  to  power  when  he  turned   eagerly  to  the  United   States
for  help.  The  Cubans  claim  that  the  only  response was  a  cold
shoulder.  When  the  new  regime  took  office  in  January,   1959,
it  found  that  Batista  had  looted  the  Treasury  and  left  Cuba's
dollar  reserves  perilously  low.   The  Cubans  say that  even  their
first  requests  for  minor  financial  accommodations   were  turned
down.  They  cite  as  examples  a  request  to  the  Ex-Im  Bank  for
a  $3,000,000  to  $4,000,000  loan  for  road  building   equipment
and  a  proposed  $1,000,000  barter  deal  of  Cuban  chrome  for
corn  to  meet  a  food   shortage.
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  August  8, 1960
(Continued  from   Page   One)
No Official  Welcome for Fidel
In  February,  1959,   one  month  after   taking  power,   Fidel
sent  a  3-man  mission  to  Washington  under  Dr.  Justo  Carillo,
then  head  of  the  Cuban  Development  Bank,  to  explore  the
possibility  of  financial  aid  to  bolster  up  Cuba's  depleted  ex-
change  reserves  and  to  make  possible  a  program  of  indus-
trialization.  The  mission was cordially  received  but  went  away
empty-handed.   Fidel  wanted  to  visit  the  U.S.  but  could  not
get an  official  invitation.  When  he finally came in  April,   1959,
it  was  in  response  to  an  unofficial  invitation.   The   President,
who  has  welcomed  some  of  the  most  unsavory  little  dictators
in  this  capital,  did  not  receive  the  hero  of  the  Cuban  revolu-
tion.   The  Secretary  of  State  met  him  in  a  hotel  room  rather
than  at  the  State  Department  to  emphasize  that  he  was  not
being  received  officially.   Fidel  brought  along  his  Ministers  of
Economics  and  Finance  and  the  president  of  the  Cuban  Na-
tional  Bank.   In  their  "courtesy  calls"  on  their  opposite  num-
bers  in  the  American  government  they  hoped  that  they  would
be  asked  how  the  U.S.  could  help  them.   Again  all  they  got
were hand-shakes.  The  month  after  their  return empty-handed
they passed  a law for  the  confiscation  of  property  belonging  to
Batista  supporters  and  then  in  June  they  finally  enacted  the
Agrarian  Reform.   The  sequence  of  events,  and  the  Cubans
themselves,  suggest  that  if  they  had  received  some  help  from
Washington  the  agrarian  reform  could  have  been  slower  and
less  drastic.   As  late  as February  of  this year,  Castro  offered  to
renew  negotiations  with  the  U.S.  over  compensation  for  ex-
propriated  U.S.  properties  if  during  the  talks  we  did  nothing
to  damage  the  Cuban  economy  (i.e.  to  cut  the  Cuban  sugar
quota)   but  drew  a  turn-down.   All  this  calls  for  impartial
re-examination  if  wiser  policies  are  to  be charted.
War  with  Cuba  would  be  folly.   To  invade  would  bog  us
down  in  a  prolonged  guerrilla  war.   To   sell  Latin  America
the  idea  of  a  joint  naval  blockade  to  shut  off  Soviet  oil  and
other  supplies  will  be  difficult   since  the  other  Latins  them-
selves  are  doing  an  increasing business with  the  Soviets.   Cuba
is  not  Guatemala.   Sooner  or  later  we  are  going  to  have  to
negotiate.   Both sides have a  stake in  the  restoration  of  friend-
On  Those  Red  Subs Seen Off Cuba
Senator   [Roman  L.]  HRUSKA  (R.  Neb.):  General,
we   had   testifying   before   us   in   open   session   same
months  ago  Pedro  Diaz  Lanz,  and  he  gave  testimony
regarding   indications   that   Communist   military   sup-
plies  were  furnished  to  the   Castro  forces.    Can  you
tell   us  anything  about  the  extent   to  which  such   aid
was   provided  through  those   sources?
General   [C.  P.]    CABELL   [deputy   director   Cl A]:
I  could  not  offhand.    I  have  not  seen  any  information
such  aid  was  given.  .  .  .
Senator  HRUSKA:  There  was  also  testimony  with
reference   to  submarines,  Russian  submarines,  having
been  observed  in  Cuban  waters.  .  .  .  Can  you  tell  us
anything  about  those?
General   CABELL:  We  have  been   unable  to   verify
any  such reports.
—Senate  Internal  Security   Committee,  Nov.  5, 1959.
ly  relations.   We  are  going  to  have  to  see  the  problems   of
Cuba  through  Cuban  eyes  if  peace  is  to  be  made.    The  anti-
Americanism,  we  will  have  to  understand,  is  not  just  dema-
gogy.   Much  of  Cuba's  problems  was  created  by  U.S.  policy.
We  think  we  liberated  Cuba  but  one  need  only  dip  into  an
authoritative  work  on  the  Spanish-American war  like  Walter
Millis's   The   Martial   Spirit   or   Carleton   Beals'   classic,   The
Crime  of  Cuba,  to  see  that  we  ended  by  fraternizing with  the
Spaniards  rather  than  the  Cubans.   The   land  laws  imposed
under  the  U.S.  occupation  wiped  out  the  communal  lands  and
laid  the  foundations  for  the  vast  latifundia  under  U.S.  cor-
porate  ownership which  made  so  many  Cubans  landless  (See
Problems   of   The   New    Cuba,   1935,   pps.   51-52).   When
Machado  was overthrown  in  1933,  and  a  new  government  un-
der  Dr.   Grau  San  Martin  initiated   a  moderate  program  of
social  and  agrarian  reform,   FDR's   emissary  Sumner  Welles
forced  it  out  of  office  and  put  Batista  in  power  behind  Men-
dieta.    (See  box  on  page  three).   Our  dislike  for  reformers
runs  as  a  consistent  thread  through  our  relations  with  Cuba.
Batista's  coup  d'etat  in  March,  1952,  when  he  saw  that  he
could  not  win  a  free  election,  was  made  three  days  after  the
Army  had  been strengthened  by a U.S.  military assistance  pact.
Eastland's  Cuban  Nightmares  and  the  CIA  View  of  Fidel  Castro's  Politics
The   CHAIRMAN   [Senator   Eastland]:   It   is   said   that
roughly  750  North  Korean  and  Communist  Chinese  fought
with  the  Castro  forces.   These  people  were  not  seen  in  the
cities  of  Cuba,  but  were  kept  in  the  interior  of  Cuba.   Do
you  have  any  knowledge  of   that?
General  C. P.  CABELL  [Deputy  Director,  Central  Intelli-
gence  Agency]:  No,  sir;   we  do  not,  and  we  would  seri-
ously  doubt  the  authenticity  of  any  such   figure.   We  have
no  evidence  of  any  participation  in  the  revolution.    Nor  do
we  have  any  knowledge  of  Chinese  Communist  No.  1  par-
ticipation.
The  CHAIRMAN: All  right.    What  do  you  have   infor-
mation  about?   About  what  Communists  fought  in  Castro's
forces?
General  CABELL:  In  Cuba?
The  CHAIRMAN:  Yes,   sir.
General  CABELL:  That  question  is  related  to  the  ques-
tion.    Is  Cuban Prime  Minister Fidel  Castro  a  Communist?
Let  me  develop  that  thought  for  you,  sir.    Our  information
shows   that   the   Cuban  Communists   do  not   consider  him
a  Communist Party  member,  or  even  a  pro-Communist  .  • .
the  Communists  consider  Castro  as  a  representative  of  the
bourgeoisie,   and  were   unable  to   gain   public  recognition
or  commitments  from  him  during  the  course   of  the  revo-
lution.
We   know  that   the   Communists   were   concerned   when,
at  the  time  of  his  trip  to  the  United   States,  he  showed
evidence   of  a  friendly   attitude  toward   the  United  States
.  .  .  Through   their   overt   propaganda   organs,   radio  and
television  commentary,  and selective  or false  news  reporting
the   Communists    hope   to   shield   Fidel,   and   the   Cuban
people,  from  news  favorable  to  U.S.  policies,  and  to  exploit
news  favorable  to the U.S....  In  terms  of  mass   following,
they   [the   Communists]   still  represent  a  minority,   though
a  very  well  organized  one  .  .  .  Within  the  26th  of   July
movement    [Castro's]   there   is   considerable    evidence   of
opposition  to  communism. ...
Senator  [Olin]  JOHNSTON  [D.  S.C.]   Is  it  not  true  that
he,  Fidel,  is  more  dangerous  than   if   he  would  come  out
and  let  them  know  that  he  was  a  Communist?
General  CABELL:  I  personally  would  agree  that  Castro
would  probably  lose   much,  or  even   most,  of   his   popular
support  should  this  occur.    However,  we believe  that  Castro
is   not  a  member  of  the   Communist  Party,   and  does   not
consider  himself   to  be  a  Communist.
—Senate, Internal   Security   Committee,  Nov.   5,  1959.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  August  S, 1960
We  recognized  the new regime March  27,  1952,  on the  ground
that  the  Cuban  people  had  "acquiesced"  in    the  seizure  of
power  although   the  presidents  of  both  houses  of  the  Cuban
Congress  had  denounced  it  and  three  days  before  recognition
a  petition  had  been  filed  with  the  Constitutional  Court   asking
that  the  new regime  be  declared  illegal.  The  petition  was filed
by  a  bold,  young  lawyer.  His  name was  Fidel  Castro.
A  Propaganda  Campaign  Like Stalin's
I  agree  with  Leo  Huberman  and  Paul  M.  Sweezy  in  their
admirable  and  indispensable   new  book,  "Cuba:  Anatomy  of
A   Revolution"   (Monthly   Review   Press,   66   Barrow   Street,
New  York  14,  $3.50)  that  Castro  is  our  Tito.   Just  as  Wash-
ington  came  to  the  aid  of  a  rebel  against  Moscow,  so  Moscow
has  come  to  the  aid  of  a  rebel  against  Washington.   One  of
Khrushchev's  wisest  moves  was when  he  made  his  peace  with
Belgrade  and  some  day  we  are  going  to  have  to  swallow  a
similar  pill  and  make  our  peace  with  Havana.    We   are  as
quick  to  equate  with  Communism  any  disposition  to  question
our  free  enterprise  party  line  as  Stalin  was  to   equate   with
Fascism  any  deviation   from  his.    One   need   only   read   Tad
Szulz's  current  series  in  the  New  York  Times  on  Cuba  to  see
that  his  attempt  to  find  a  Red  menace  in  Cuba  and  a  popular
revolt  against  Castro   is  just  about   as  thin   as  the   evidence
Communist  party  hacks  tried  to  marshal  against  Tito.
Those  who  are  not  blinded  by  Red  menace  and  cold  war
stereotypes  cannot  help  but  see and  feel  in  Cuba  the  love and
devotion  which  the  masses  feel  for  Fidel.   Should   anything
happen  to  him,  he  will  live  on  as  an  inspiration  to  the  poor
and  their  champions   in  Latin  America.   I  did  not  meet  him
but  I  heard  him  on  TV  July  19  while  a  Cuban  friend  trans-
lated.   He  marshals  his  arguments  and  facts  with  the  capacity
and  precision  of  a  great  lawyer.   Of  the  top  echelon  I  met
only  Che  Guevara  with  whom  I  had  an  off  the  record  talk  at
the  National  Bank.   This  self-exiled  Argentinian  physician of
32  who  knows  at  first  hand  the  terrible  poverty  of  the  Latin
American  peasants  and  Indies  is  extraordinary  in  his  beauty
(there is no other  word  for  it),  his  simplicity  and  his  sobriety.
From  my meeting  with  Dr.  Guevara  and  from  the   biographies
of  the  top  leadership,  I  believe  the  young  men  around  Fidel
•e as unusual  and  gifted  a group  as  those who  made  our  own
The  Last  Time  Cuba Tried  Land  Reform
"During  its  four  months  in  office   [in  1933  after  the
fall  of  Machado],  the  Grau  government  enacted  .  .  .
an  8-hour  day ...  a  minimum  wage  for  cutting  sugar
cane  .  .  .  the  initiation  of  a  program  for   agrarian
reform ...  a  reduction  in  electricity  rates.  .  .  . The
Grau  government aroused  intense  hostility  on  the  part
of   business   interests.   .  .  .  Mr.  Sumner  Welles,  the
American   Ambassador,  was   strongly   opposed  to   the
regime,   and  the  U.S.   refused  to  recognize   it.       ...
In  January  1934 the  army  [newly  led by  Batista]  .  .  .
finally  turned  against  Grau,  who  was  forced  to  resign
.  . . The resentment of  many Cubans has  been  increased
by   the  accusation  that   the  Mendieta  coalition,  which
succeeded   Grau,   was   and  is   largely   the  creature   of
American   diplomacy.    It   is   pointed  out   that   Wash-
ington  extended  recognition  to  President  Mendieta five
days  after  he  took  office,   although  it  had  denied  rec-
ognition   to  President   Grau,  who  stayed   in  office   four
months."
—Problems   of   the   New   Cuba,  Report   of   the   Com-
mission  on  Cuban  Affairs,    Foreign  Policy  Association,
1935,  Senator   Gruening  of  Alaska   was  a  member.
American  Revolution  and  those  who  wrote  the  Constitution.
Only  the  myopic folly  that  afficts  the  comfortable  stand-patters
in  every  revolutionary  age  could  lead  us  to  see  them   as  "a
bevy  of  beatniks"  (Wall  Street  Journal,  July  29).
I  ended  my last  letter  on a note of  suspense after  telling of
my  visit  to  Havana's  most  notorious  shanty-town  squatter  set-
tlement   "Las  Yaguas"  where  the  residents  insisted  that  the
mysterious  numbers  and  letters  on  their  miserable  homes  were
the  block  and  house  numbers  of  new  dwellings  being  prepared
for  them  by  the  government.    I  solved  the  mystery  two  days
later  at  the  Social  Welfare  Ministry  where  I  found  a  division
in  charge  of  planning  the  replacement  of  these  slums  and  saw
the  blueprints  for  the  ten  settlements  which  will  replace   "Las
Yaguas".   The  official  in  charge  was  a  Senora  Concha  Ferrer,
who  was with  Fidel  in  the  rebel  army  where  her  job  was  or-
ganizing   schools   among  the  peasants   in  the  Sierra  Maestri.
Her  second-in-command  was  a  young  sociologist,  Dr.  Alvan
H.   Sanchez.   They  had  made  a  comprehensive   study  of   the
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
From  the  Raul  Castro  Land  Reform  Speech  Which Is  Supposed to  Prove  Him  A  Red
"The   Cuban  patriots  of   1895,  under  the   leadership  of
Marti  and  Maceo,  aspired to  something more than liberation
from   Spain.    They   wanted  to  bring   about   economic   and
social  changes  here.  .  .  .  Marti  knew  that  the  concentration
of  land in  the  hands  of  a  few  not  only  engendered  injustice,
inequality  and  distress  but  that  it  also  caused  permanent
political  upheavals.  .  .  .
"The   independence  of   our  country  will   never   become
complete  unless  it   is  based  on  economic  liberation.   And
in   this   modern  world,  economic  freedom  means   agrarian
diversification,   industrialization,  the  breaking  up  of  com-
mercial  monopolies—all  that  which  had  been  forecast   by
the  genius  of  Jose  Marti;  all  that  .  .  .  must  be  based  in
Cuba  on  a  complete  transformation of  the  land  ownership
system,   on  the  Land  Reform;  and  on  the  Reform  of   the
Customs  System  that  protects  our incipient  industries.  .  .  .
"In  order  to  develop its  industries  Cuban  must  have  an
internal   market,  and  there  can   be   no   Cuban  market   if
half  the  population of  Cuba,  that  is  to  say,  the  small farm-
ers  and  agricultural  workers,  live  in  abject  poverty.   For
example,  Cuba's  present-day  footwear  industry  has  a  pro-
duction  capacity  of   almost  30  million  pairs   of   shoes   of
every  type.   Yet  it  must  be  inactive  much  of  the  year  and
because  there  is  no  market  only  14  to  16  million  pairs  of
shoes  are  produced.
"When,   through   the   Land   Reform,   all   Cuban   farmers
will  have  an  adequate  income,  the  footwear  industry,   the
cigar  industry,  the  textile  and  garment  industry,  the  can-
ning  industry,  all  of  these  will   prosper.   .  .  .  The  Land
Reform   is   a   starting   point   for   the   progress   of   Cuban
industry;  and  we  are  sure  that  there  will  be  many  wealthy
Cubans,   Cubans   with   useful   wealth,   who  will   see   it   in
this  light."
—The  text  of  this  speech  by  Major   Raul  Castro,  Fidel'a
brother,  before   the  first  Forum  on Land  Reform,  was  trans-
lated  from   the  June   30,  1959,  issue  of  Revolucion,  organ
of   the  July   26  movement,  and  inserted   by  Spruille   Braden
in  his  testimony .July   17,  1959,  before   the  Senate   Internal
Security   Committee   as   proof    of  his  assertion,   "I   am   not
100  percent  positive  that  Fidel  himself   is  a Communist  . . .
his  brother  is."    The  text,  at  pages  259-72, of  Part  V,  of
the  committee's  hearings  on "Communist  Threat  to  the  U.S.
Through  the  Caribbean"  hardly  supports  the   charge.—IFS
i  2 •;
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. -Stone's   Weekly,  August   8,   1960
Fidel  and  His  Young  Men  Comparable  in  Ability  to  Our  Leaders  of  1776
(Continued   from   Page  Three)
squatter  settlement  and  of  the  human  resources  buried  in  it.
They   did  an  occupational  survey  and  found  many  men  with
skilled   building  trades   experience   in   "Las   Yaguas".   Their
plans  call  for  the  breaking  up  of  the  settlement  into  ten  scat-
tered  sections  to  end  gangster  rule  among  the  squatters.    They
plan  to  enlist  the  people  in  making  their  own  homes  and  the
prefabricated   concrete  blocks  with  which   to  construct   them.
The  new  settlements  will  be  adjacent  to  new  factories  to  be
established  by  INRA,  the  agrarian   reform  agency,  to  provide
employment.   Each  settlement will  have  its  school  and  recrea-
tion  centers.  They  took  me  to  see a smaller squatter  settlement
and  the  new  community its  inhabitants were  already  building
for  themselves.  Everything  is  planned  with  an  eye  to  partici-
pation,  self-help  and  the  restoration  of  self-respect.
New  Style Revolutionary  Incitements
I  have  curtailed  travelogue  the  better  to  plead  for  under-
standing  of  Cuba's  case in  the hateful atmosphere  I  found  here
in  Washington   on  my  return.   I  only  wish  more  Americans
would  go  and  see for  themselves what  the  new  regime is  doing
before  our  government  finds  some  excuse to  take  out  on  Castro
our  frustrations   about  Khrushchov.   No   one  with   any  sym-
pathy  for  human  suffering,  aspiration  and  devotion  can  come
away  from  a  few  days  of  touring  amid  the  new  housing  de-
velopments  urban  and  rural  and  among  the  cooperatives  with-
out  himself  acquiring new hope  and  faith.   I  remember among
the  high  points  of  my  own  tour  the  well-to-do  small  farmer
who  had  left  his  own  farm.in  care  of  his  son  while  he  took
over  training  and  direction  of  the  new  mixed  cooperative  es-
tablished  on  one  of  the  properties  taken  from  Batista's  family
at  Los  Pinos.   I  remember  the  spotless medical clinic with  the
well-stocked  cupboard  of  medicines  at  the  new  cooperative in
the  miserable  and   muddv  fishing  village  at  Punta  del  Carta,
and  the  bright  eyed  young woman  doctor  in  charge,  the  first
the  village  had  ever  had.  I  remember  the  appeal  on  the  bulle-
tin   board  asking   the   villagers   to   "help   your  revolutionary
government"  and  the  revolutionary  acts  this  "incited".  Among
them  were  "burn al!'trash."  "use  sanitary  latrines",  "boil  water
and  milk  before  using"  and  "wash  your  hands  and  your  chil-
dren's  before  eating."
One  Source  of   Anti-Americanism
"One   element   in   the   picture   is   clear   enough:   the
disillusionment   and  distrust   felt   by  democratic  leaders
in   Latin  America   when   the   U.S.,   leader   of   the   'free'
world,   provides  aid  which   is  so  frequently   put  to  in-
ternal   political  use,   and  thereby   underwrites,  the  anti-
democratic   forces.   .  .  .  The  mere   presence   of   newly
provided   U.S.   military  equipment   in  the  country   tends
to   persuade   the  people   that   the   U.S.   is   underwriting
the   tyranny   under   which   they   suffer.    The   rancor   of
the  victorious  forces  of  Fidel  Castro  in  Cuba  against
the   U.S.   military   mission  and  the  arms   aid  program,
on  the  ground   that   they  helped   to  maintain   Batista's
tyranny,  provides  a  clear    illustration."
—Edwin  Licuwen: Arms  and Politics  in  Latin Amer-
ica,  published   by  Council   on  Foreign  Relations,   1960,
I  remember  the  pride  shown  by  the  members  of   the  new
tobacco  cooperative  about  100  miles  from  Havana  named  for
two  revolutionary heroes,  the  Brothers  Saiz:  the  pastel  shaded
pre-fabricated   houses,  the  clean  new  6-grade  school  with  its
spotless  kitchens where  free  lunches are  prepared  for  the  chil-
dren,  the  new  People's   Store  clean  and  well-stocked  with  a
wide  variety  of  goods  from  groceries  to  pots  and  pans.   Its
refrigerators  for  perishable  foodstuffs   and   its  neat  shelves  of
canned  goods  would  attract  attention  and  approval  even  in  a
rural  town  of  our  own,  much  less  Cuba's.   I  remember  the
peasants  who  had  come in  from  the  surrounding neighborhood
to  shop  and  to  see these new  sights.   Earlier  on  the  way out  I
had  seen  some  "bohios",  the  thatched  roof,  mud  floor,  one
room  hut  without water  or  sanitary  facilities  which  are  char-
acteristic  of  the  Cuban  country  side.  Now   at  the  cooperative
I  visited   the  one   story  homes,  some  with  two,  others  with
three  bedrooms, built  for  members of  the  cooperative. Country
folk  who  had  never  had  a  school  even  for  their  children were
now  going  to  night  classes  themselves.   The  bright  faces,  the
cleanliness  of  the  new  houses,  the  gardens  around  them,  were
visible signs that the  revolution  in  Cuba  was more than rhetori-
cal.   And  I  remember  the  shy  farmer  in  one  of  these  houses
who  at  the  end  of  an  interview  when  asked  what  he  thought
of  Castro fell  silent. When  we were halfway  down the  walk  he
cried  out  after  us,  "I  would  die  for  Fidel."
IFS   Off   on  Combination  Vacation  and  European  Reconnaissance  Trip—Next   Issue  Will  Be  Dated  Labor  Day
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington  15,  D.  C.
Please  renew  (or  enter)  my  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:*
Name        ,.,....„.__.......-......„.........................—._„..„-........_......—
Street
Citv
Enter  gift  sub
(To)    Name  ..
Street   ............
City    ..............
Shall  we  send
Zone          State
8/8/60
for  $2  (6  mos.)   or  $4  (1  yr.)   additional:
gift  announcement?          Yes  D'NO'D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,    N.   W.
Washington   15,   D.  C.
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Entered  as   Second  Class  Matter  at  Washington,  D.  C.,  under  the  Act  of  March  3.  1879.    Post-dated  Mondays  but  pub-
lished  every  Thursday  except  the  last  two   Thursdays  of  August  and  December  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.,  Washington  15,  D.  C.
An   independent   weekly   published   and   edited   by   I.   F.   Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:
$5  in   the   U.  S.:    $<5  in  Canada:  $10  elsewhere.    Air  Mall  rates:  $15  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED