I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jun20.pdf

============================================================

Peace  Candidates  Did  Well  in  California^   P.  3
So  LBJ  Still  Won't  Let  Them  Say  Plainly  That  We'll  Negotiate  With  The  NLP
"There   was   one   important   gap   in   Goldberg's  speech     ously  been cleared to  make  veiled comments  suggesting  that
[Catholic  University,  June  5].    Some  people  hoped  that  he     we  will  talk  with  the  Viet  Cong.    Humphrey and  Goldberg
would   end  the   murkiness   over   the   U.S.   attitude  toward
Viet   Cong  participation   in   any   peace  talks.    The   Vice-
wanted  to  end  the  doubletalk and  say  simply  'any  and  all
combatants'  can  come  to  the  peace  table.  .  .  .  Goldberg's
President,  the  Secretary  of   State  and  others  have  previ-     speech  .  .  .  was  conspicuously  silent  on  the  subject."
—Carl  Rowan,  Chicago  Daily  News,  June  9.   Rowan  as  former   head  of   USIA   and  pro-Administration   columnist,  has
access  to  inner  White  House  circles.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV, NO. 22
JUNE  20,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
How  Many  More  Vietnams  Can We  Handle?
Two   Saturday   Evening  Post  writers  have  just  come  back
from  the  mountains  of  Guatemala.    "You  think  you  have  a
big  problem  in  Vietnam,"  a  guerrilla  leader  who  calls  him-
self  Tito  told  them,  "Wait  until  the  Marines  come  to  Guate-
mala." *     In   two   more   years  the   guerrillas   expect   to  be
ready.    "We  think  your  government  will  intervene  here  just
as  they  did  in  1954,"  Tito  said.    "But  we  will  win  because
all  the  peasants  are  with  us."    There  are  guerrillas  who  talk
this  way  in   Peru   and   Colombia,   where  we  already  supply
helicopters  and  napalm  for  use  against  them.    The  poverty-
stricken  Northeast  of  Brazil  is  among  the  other  places  in  the
hemisphere   where  guerrilla   uprisings  may  some   day  make
their   appearance.     What   are  we  going  to  do  about  them?
Are   we   automatically  to  go   to  war   against   them?     How
many  Vietnams  can  we  fight  at  once?    "We   must  find  an
alternative  to  wars of  attrition,"  says an editorial  in  Air  Force/
Space  Digest  for  June,  "if  we  are  to  be  able  to  cope  with  a
succession  of  Vietnams  in  various  parts  of   the   globe,   con-
ceivably  more  than  one  at  a  time."    Or  it  is  we  who  will  be
worn   down.
The  Same  Old  Body  Count
Much   of   what   the   Post   writers   report   from   Guatemala
sounds   familiar   after   Vietnam.     They   visited   a   mountain
hamlet  raided  by  the  Guatemalan  army.    The  soldiers  killed
14  hostages  and  "left  their  bodies  to  rot"  in  the  mountains.
"The   army  told  the  government  that  those  killed  were  guer-
rillas,"  explained  Turcios  [another  guerrilla  leader].    "They
didn't   kill   any  guerrillas,  but   instead  they  made  everybody
here  a  guerrilla."    This  mistreatment  of  the  peasants  is  how
it  all  began  under  Diem.    Since  the  CIA  engineered  the  re-
volt  that  overthrew   Arbenz   in  Guatemala   in   1954   and  re-
placed  him  with  a  military dictatorship,  we  have  given  Guate-
mala  $170,000,000  in  economic  aid  and  we  have  been  spend-
ing  almost  $2,000,000  a  year  on  its  army.   A  rigged  election
under  a  rigged  Constitution  has  now  restored  a  semblance of
democracy weak enough  to  satisfy  the  army.   But  a  U.S.  official
there  told  the  Post writers  the  situation  was  "the  most  critical
in  the   hemisphere."
We'd   like  to  supplement  the  SEP  story  with  some  back-
•The  Undeclared War  in  Guatemala,  SEP,  June  18.
No  Need  To  Wait  For  The  Second  Coming
I  have  found  that  the  objectives  of  American  foreign
policy  are  widely  understood,  respected  and  supported.
—Secretary   Rusk   at  Council  on  Foreign   Relations,
May   24.
I  don't  know  of  any  subject  on  which  the  American
public  has  been  more  informed  than  Vietnam.
—Secretary   Rusk   at   the  White   House,  June   11.
Secretary  of  State  Rusk  told  a  House  subcommittee
yesterday  there  is  no  cause  for  pessimism  on  the  out-
look for NATO.     —AP  in  Washington  Post, June  H.
ground.    So  long  as  Guatemala  was  ruled  by  a  military  dic-
tator  who  played  ball  with  U.S.  interests,  we  didn't  care  what
else  he  did.    General  Ubico,  who  stayed  in  power  from   1931
to  1944,  was  the  Batista  of  Guatemala.    When  a  democrati-
cally  elected   successor,   a  military  man  named   Col.   Arbenz,
moved  to  take  some  of  the  idle  lands  of  United   Fruit   in  a
moderate  agrarian  reform  program,  he  ran  into  trouble.    John
Foster  Duties  raised  a  Red  scare  against  Arbenz,  and  mobil-
ized  some  of  the  same  cast  of  characters  now  operating   on
Vietnam.    Henry  Cabot  Lodge  was  then  our  Ambassador   to
the   United   Nations   and   manfully   fought   off   Guatemala's
attempt   to   appeal   to  the  UN.     Lyndon  B.  Johnson,   then
minority  leader,  put  the  Democrats   behind  Dulles  and   the
CIA  with  a  Senate  resolution   "affirming   the  Monroe   Doc-
trine."    After  Arbenz  was  overthrown,  the  new   government
restored  the  United  Fruit  Company  land,  and  rescinded   the
agrarian  reform.    Thus   the  hemisphere  was  made  for   free
enterprise  again.
The  bill  coming  due  for  the  CIA's  success  may  be  a  heavy
one.    Its  triumph  merely  smothered  discontent.     Now   it  is
bursting  out  again.    "We  are  going  to  start  the  fight,"  the
Post  writers  heard  a  guerrilla  leader  tell  a  village   audience,
"by  taking  the  land  from   the  rich  landholders,   and  we  are
going  to  give  you  the  land  to  cultivate."     A  similar  appeal
has  made  the  Mekong  delta  a  stronghold   of  Vietnamese  re-
bellion  for  a  quarter  century  against  French  and  U.S.  troops
alike.
In  a  pamphlet   defending  the  military  assistance   program,
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  SO, 1966
Portrait  of  A  U.S.  General  Personally  "Zapping"  The  Viet  Cong
By  Nicholas   Tomalin
After  a  light  lunch  last  Wednesday,  General
James  F.  Hollingsworth,  of  the  U.S.  "Big  Red
I"  division, took   off  in  his  personal  helicopter
and   killed   more  Vietnamese  than  any  of   the
troops  he  was  commanding.   The  story  of  the
General's   feat   begins   in   his   divisional   office,
at  Di-Na,  twenty  miles  north  of  Saigon,  where
a   Medical   Corps   Colonel   is   telling   me   that
when   they  collect   enemy  casualties   they  find
themselves  with  more  than  four  injured   civil-
ians   for   every   wounded   Vietcong—unavoid-
able  in  this  kind  of  war.
The  General   has  a  big,  real  American  face,
reminiscent   of   every  movie  general   you  have
ever  seen.     He   comes  from   Texas   and  is  48.
His    present    rank   is   Brigadier-General,   As-
sistant   Division   Commander,   1st   Infantry.
Charlie  Returning
"Our   mission  today,"  says  the  General,   "is
to   push  those  goddam   VCs  right   off  Routes
13  and   16.    Now   you  see  Routes  13  and   16
running  North   from   Saigon  toward  the  town
of   Phuoc  Vinh  where   we  keep   our   artillery.
When   we  got  here  first  we  prettied  up  those
roads,  and  cleared  Charlie  Cong  right  out  so
we  could  run  our  supplies  up.    I  guess  we've
been   hither   and  whither  with  all   our  opera-
tions  since,  an'  the  ol'   VC  he's   reckoned  he
could    creep    back.     He's    been   putting   out
propaganda   he's  going  to   interdict  our   right
of   passage   along   those   routes.     So  this   day
we  aim  to  zapp  him,  and  zapp  him,  and  zapp
him   again   till   we've  zapped   him   right  back
where  he  came  from."
The  General's UH  18  helicopter  carries  two
pilots,   two   60-calibre   machine  gunners,   and
his   aide   Dennis   Gillman,   an   apple-cheeked
subaltern   from   California.     The   General   sits
at  the  helicopter's  open  door,  knees  apart,  his
tiny  black  toecaps  jutting  out  into  space,  rolls
a    filtertip    cigarette   to-and-fro    in    his    teeth
and  thinks.    "Put  me  down  at  battalion  HQ,"
he  calls  to  the  pilot.    "There's  sniper  fire  re-
ported  on  choppers  in  that  area,  General."
"Goddam  the  snipers,  just  put  me  down."
Battalion  HQ  at  the  moment  is  a defoliated
area  of  four  acres  packed  with  tents,  personnel
carriers,   helicopters  and   milling  GI's.     We
settle  into  crushed  grass.    The   General   leaps
out   and   strides  through   his   troops.
"Why  General,  excuse  us,  we  didn't   expect
you   here,"   says  a  sweating   major.
"You   killed  any  Cong  yet?"
"Well    no   General,   I   guess   he's   just   too
wared   of   us   today.    Down   the   road   apiece
we've  hit  trouble,  a  bulldozer's fallen  through
a  bridge,  and  trucks  coming through  a  village
knocked   the   canopy  off   a   Buddhist   pagoda.
Saigon  radioed  us  to  repair  that  temple  before
proceeding—in  the   way  of  civic  action,   Gen-
eral.    That   put   us  back  an   hour."
Back  through  the  crushed  grass  to  the  heli-
copter.    "I   don't   know  how  you  think  about
the  war.    The  way  I  see  it,  I'm  just  like  any
other  company  boss,  gingering  up  the  boys  all
the  time,  except   I  don't  make  money.    I  just
kill   people,   and   save   lives."     A   plume  of
white  rises  in  the  midst  of  dense  tropical  for-
est  with  a   "Bird   Dog"    spotter   plane   in  at-
tendance.    Route  16  is  to  the  right;  beyond  it
a  large  settlement  of  red-tiled   houses.
"Strike  coming  in   sir."
Two   F-105  jets  appear  over  the  horizon   in
formation,    split,   then   one   passes    over   the
smoke,  dropping   a  trail   of   silver  fish-shaped
canisters.     After   four   seconds   silence,    light
orange  fire  explodes   in  patches  along  an  area
fifty  yards   wide   by  three-quarters   of   a  mile
long.     Napalm.
"Aaaah,"  cried  the  General.    "Nice,     Nice.
Very  neat.    Come  in  low,  lets  see  who's   left
down  there."
"How   do  you  know  for  sure  the  Viet  Cong
snipers  were  in  that   strip  you   burned?"
"We   don't.     The   smoke   position   was   a
guess.    That's  why  we  zapp  the  whole  forest."
I   point   at   a   paddy  field  less   than   a   half
mile  away  full   of  peasants.
"That's    different    son,    we    know    they're
genuine."
The  pilot  shouts:   "General  half  right,   two
running  for  the  bush."
"I   see  them.    Down,  down,  goddam  you."
In  one  movement  he  yanks  his  M-16  off  the
hanger,  slams  in  a  clip  of  cartridges  and  leans
right  out  of  the  door,  hanging  on  his  seatbelt
to  fire  one  long  burst  in  the  general   direction
of   the   bush.
"But  General  how  do  you know  those  aren't
just   frightened   peasants?"
"Running  like  that?  Don't  give  me a  pain."
We  circle  now  above  a  single-story   building
made  of  dried   reeds.     The  first  burst   of  fire
tears   open   the   roof,   shatters   one   wall   into
fragments   of   scattered   straw   and   blasts    the
farmyard    full   of   chickens   into    dismembered
feathers.    "Zapp,  Zapp,  Zapp,"   cries  the  Gen-
eral.    He  is  now  using  semi-automatic  fire,  the
carbine  bucking  in  his  hands,   "gas  bomb."
Lieutenant  Gillman  leans  his  canister  out  of
the  door.    As  the  pilot  calls,  he  drops  it.    An
explosion   of   white   vapor   spreads   across   the
wood   a  full   hundred  yards  downwind.
"Jesus  wept,  lootenant,  that's  no  good."
Lieutenant   Gillman   clambers   across   me   to
get  the  second  gas  bomb.   This  bomb  explodes
perfectly   beside   the   house,   covering   it   with
vapor.    "There's  nothing  alive  in  there,"  says
the  General,   "or   they'd  be  skedaddling.    Yes
there  is,  by  golly."
For   the   first   time   I   too   see   the   running
figure,  bobbing   and  sprinting   across  the  farm-
yard  toward  a  clump  of  trees  dressed  in  black
pajamas.    No   hat,  no   shoes.
"Now   hit  the  tree."
We  circle  five  times.  Branches  drop  off  the
tree,   leaves  fly,  its   trunk   is   enveloped   with
dust  and  tracer   flares.   Gillman  offers   me  his
gun.    No  thanks.
'Red  Flag"  in  Each  Hand
Then   a   man  runs   from   the   tree,   in   each
hand  a  bright  red  flag  which  he  waves  desper-
ately  above  his  head.  "Stop,  stop,  he's   quit,"
shouts  the  General,  knocking  the  machine  gun
so   tracers   erupt   into   the   sky.     The   figure
walks  toward   us.    "That's  a  Cong   for  sure,"
cries  the  General  in  triumph  and  with  one  deft
movement  grabs  the  man's short  black  hair  and
yanks  him  aboard.     The   prisoner  falls   across
Lt.  Gillman  and  into  the  seat  beside  me.    The
red  flags  I  spotted   from  the  air  are  his  hands,
bathed   solidly   in   blood.      Further   blood   is
pouring  from  under  his  shirt,  over  his  trousers.
Now  we  are  safely  in  the  air  again.    Our  cap-
tive  cannot  be  more  thas  16 years  old,  his  head
comes  just about  up  to  the  white  name  patch—
Hollingsworth—on  the  General's  chest.    He  is
dazed,  in  shock,  his   eyes  calmly  look   first   at
the   General,   then   at  the   Lieutenant,   then   at
me.     He   resembles   a   tiny,   fine-boned   wild
animal.    He   is   quivering.
"Radio   base   for   an   ambulance.     Get   the
information    officer   with   a   camera.     I   want
this  Commie  bastard  alive  till  we get  back  .  . .
just   stay  with  us  till  we  talk  to  you,   baby."
The  General  pokes  with  his  carbine  first  at  the
prisoner's  cheek  to  keep  his  head  upright,  then
at  the  base  of  his  shirt.    "Look  at  that   now,"
he   said   turning  to   me     "You   still   thinking
about  innocent  peasants?    Look  at  that  weap-
onry."
A  Set  of  VC  Songs
Around   the   prisoner's   waist   is  a   webbing
belt   with   four   clips   of  ammunition,   a   water
bottle  (without  stopper),   a  tiny  roll  of  band-
ages  and  a  propaganda  leaflet which  later  turns
out  to  be  a  set  of  Vietcong  songs.
Lt.   Gillman    looks    concerned.      "Its    OK,
you're   OK,"   he  mouths  at  the  prisoner,  who
at  that  moment  turns  to  me  and  with  a   sur-
prisingly   vigorous   gesture   waves   his   arm   at
my   seat.     He   wants   to   lie   down.     By   the
time  I  have  fastened   myself   into   yet  another
seat  we  are  back  at  the  landing  pad.    Ambu-
lance   orderlies   come  aboard,   administer    mor-
phine,   and  rip   open   his  shirt.     Obviously   a
burst   of  fire  has  shattered  his   right   arm   up
at   the   shoulder.    The   cut   shirt   now   allows
a   large   bulge   of   blue-red   tissue  to   fall   for-
ward,   its   surface   streaked   with   white   nerve
fibres  and   chips   of   bone   (how   did   he   ever
manage  to  wave  that  arm  in  surrender?).
When   the   ambulance   has   driven   off,   the
General  gets  us  all  posed   around   the  nose  of
the   chopper   for   a  group   photograph    like  a
gang  of  successful   fishermen.   He  is  euphoric.
"Jeez  I'm  so  glad  you  was  along,  that   worked
out   just   dandy.     I've   been   written   up   time
and  time  again  back  in  the  states  for  shootin'
up  VCs,  but  no  one's  been  along  with  me  like
you   before."      He   gives   me   the   Vietcong's
bottle  as  a  souvenir.    "That's  a  Chicom   bot-
tle,  that  one.    All  the  way  from   Peking."
Later  that  evening  the  General   calls  me  to
his   office   to  tell  me  that  the  prisoner  had  to
have  his  arm  amputated,  and   is  now  in   the
hands  of  the  Vietnamese   authorities,  as  regu-
lations   dictate.      Before   he   went   under,    he
told  the  General's  interpreters  that  he  was  part
of   a   hard   core   regular   VC   company   whose
mission  was  to  mine  Route  16,  cut  it  up,  and
fire   at   helicopters.     The   General   is   magna-
mimous   in    his   victory   over   my   squeamish
civilian   worries.     "I'll   say  perhaps   your   Eng-
lish  generals   wouldn't   think  my  way  of   war
is  too  conventional,   would  they?
"There's  no  better  way  to  fight  then  goin'
out  to  shoot  VCs.    And  there's  nothing  I  love
better   than  killin'   Cong.    No    sir."
—London  Sunday  Times,  June  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

LF. Stone's Weekly,  June  SO, 1966
ADA  Opposes  More  Troops  For  Vietnam
"Despite  the  obvious  breakup  of  authority  in  South
'  Vietnam, an unrepresentative  South  Vietnamese regime,
the  continuing  destruction  of  Vietnamese  resources  for
national  rebuilding  and  despite  the  increasing  danger
of  a  major power  confrontation in  Southeast  Asia,  the
U.S.  government is  reported to  be on the  verge  of  send-
ing  another  100,000 men to  South  Vietnam.   We  oppose
this  as  reckless,  foolhardy  and  destructive  of  the  hope
for   peace  and  self-determination   for  the   Vietnamese
people.   We urge a cessation of  bombing of  North Viet-
nam  and  a  de-escalation  of  the  war  in  the  South."
—ADA  National Board, June is.
New  Politics  Group,  and  Three  Big  City  Mayors,  Link  Peace  to  Need  at  Home
Peace  Candidates  Made  A  Remarkable  Showing  in  California
You'd  hardly  guess  it  from  newspaper  coverage,  but  peace
candidates  did  extraordinarily  well  in  the  recent  California
Democratic  primaries.    Robert  Scheer  in  the  7th  District  and
Philip  Drath  in  the  1st  got  45%   of  the  vote  while  Edward
Keating,  publisher  of  Ramparts  magazine,  polled   47.6%   in
the  llth  and   Stanley  Sheinbaum   over   40%   in  the    13th.
Scheer,  running  as  a  radical  candidate  on  economic  issues  as
well  as  foreign  policy,  carried  Berkeley  and  the  Negro  sec-
tion  of  Oakland  against  the  liberal  Cohelan.
What  Their  Pressure   Did
To   meet   Scheer's  challenge,   Cohelan   put   a  distance   be-
tween  himself   and  the  Johnson  position  on  the  war.    In  the
First  district,  the  Quaker  carpenter  Drath  forced  the  winner,
Thomas  Storer,  a  popular  Marin  county -lawyer  to  come  out
for  direct  negotiations  with  the  Viet  Cong  and  a  cease-fire,
to  be  policed  by  the  Geneva  powers.    Three  anti-war  Con-
gressmen,  Burton,  Edwards and  Brown  had  no  difficulty  being
renominated  in  the  5th,  9th  and  29th.    Earlier  two  peace  can-
didates  won  the  Democratic  nomination   elsewhere,    Charles
Porter  in  the  4th  district  of  Oregon  and  Joseph  Varon  in  the
10th   of   Florida.    These  results   should   hearten   support  of
peace  candidates  in  other   areas.
It  is  to  aid  such  candidates  that  a  group   of  well-known
liberals  and  radicals,  of  both  the  Old  and  New  Left,  last  week
formed  a  National   Conference  for  New  Politics.    Essentially
this  represents  a  coalition  of  peace  workers  with  civil   rights
and   anti-poverty   forces.    It  will  not  be  a  membership   or-
ganization.    According  to  its  announcement,  it  will   "concen-
trate  primarily  on  supplying  funds  and  personnel,  and  gather-
ing  and  funnelling   research  information  and  political   cam-
paign  techniques  to  the  candidates  it  endorses."    As  a  first
step  it  plans  a  series  of  summer  workshops  in  campaign  tech-
niques.    It  is  co-chaired  by  Julian  Bond,  who  might  be  de-
scribed  as  of—but  not  in—the  Georgia  House  of  Representa-
tives,   and   Simon   Casady,  past   president   of   the   California
Democratic  Council.    The  philosophy  of  the  new organization
is   best   expressed   by  this   paragraph   from   its   statement   of
purpose:
This  new  politics  is  built  by  people  who demand that  our
nation  fulfil  its  pledge  to  abolish  racial  discrimination  and
poverty;  who  understand  the  necessity   of  ending  the  Cold
War  and American military intervention  abroad,  and  creat-
ing   world  disarmament   and   a  . decent   relationship   with
societies   undertaking  revolutionary  change;  who  want  to
end  the  depletion  of   our  resources   by  the   ever-growing
military  budget  and  use  our  enormous  productive  capacity
for  meeting  the  staggering   social  needs  that  led  to  Watts,
for  ending  the  public  squalor  that  disfigures our  cities,  our
suburbs  and  our  countryside  and  for  building  a  good  so-
ciety   at  home  and  abroad.
These  idealistic  goals,  which  would  normally  be  dismissed
as  pie-in-the-sky,   are   rapidly  becoming   central   and   urgent
concerns.  The  day  the  National   Conference  for  New   Politics
held  its  initial  press  conference  in  New  York,  the  Mayors  of
New  York,  Detroit  and  Boston  expressed  remarkably  parallel
views   on   Meet   The   Press.     Mayor  Cavanaugh   of    Boston
stressed  increased  effort  for  peace  in  order  to  divert  the  "$30
million   a  day"  spent  in  Vietnam  to  "the   war  on   poverty,
urban   renewal   and  civil  rights."    Mayor  Collins  of   Boston
said  he  "completely  concurred."   Mayor  Lindsay  of  New  York
declared  that  if  the  demonstration  cities  act  now  pending  in
Congress   should   fail   "because   of   the   priority   pressures   of
Vietnam,   it  would   be,  I  think,  a  national  disaster."     New
York's  Mayor  predicted  as  much  trouble  at  home  as  abroad
unless  the  problem  of  the  urban  slum  was  met.    "Unless  we
can  establish   civilizations  that  are  progressive   and   peaceful
here  at  home,"  was  Mayor  Lindsay's  memorable  summation,
"we  are  not  going  to  do  it  anywhere  else."
Supreme  Court  Finally  Vindicates  A  Labor Leader  Hounded by HUAC
The  unanimous  decision  of  the  Supreme Court  in  the  Go-
jack  case  is  another  defeat  for  the  Un-American Activities
Committee.    It   shows  the   court   disposed  to  construe  all
rules  strictly  against  the  Committee in  order  to  avoid  up-
holding  the  contempt  convictions  of  recalcitrant  witnesses,
but  still  reluctant to  rule against  the  Committee on broader
grounds.    The  Go jack  case  is  an  especially  sleazy  example
of  this  sleazy  committee's  operations.
Mr.  Gojack   was  Michigan-Indiana  district  president  of
the  United  Electrical  Workers in  1955 when  it  was  getting
ready  for  an  NLRB  election  in  the  Magnavox  plant  at  Ft.
Wayne,   Ind.    The   head   of   the   company  wrote  his  Con-
gressman  who  in  turn  wrote  to  the  House  Committee.   It
furnished  Magnavox  with  Mr.  Gojack's  dossier  as  a  radi-
cal.   The  supply  of  such  records  for  smear  purposes  is  still
one  of   HUAC's  main   undercover  functions.     HUAC   also
scheduled  a  hearing in  Ft.  Wayne,  subpoenaed  Gojack  and
released  a  flood  of  unfavorable publicity on  the  eve  of  the
voting.    "All  of  us,"  said  the  late  Chairman Walter  when
Mr.  Gojack  finally  appeared, "are  interested  in  seeing  your
union  go  out  of  business.    The  labor  leader  answered  cer-
tain  questions  but  declined  on  First  amendment  grounds
to  answer others  which  would  have put  him  in  the  position,
in  those  McCarthyite  days,  of  being  a  political informer.
Mr.   Gojack's   first   conviction  was   thrown   out   by   the
Court  four  years  ago,  with  Harlan  and  Clark  dissenting,
on  the  ground  that  the  indictment was  defective.    He  was
retried,  and  the  new  conviction  is  again  thrown out.    This
time  Harlan  and  Clark  agreed.    Mr.  Justice  Fortas  ruled
for   the   Court  that  the  Committee  failed   properly   to   au-
thorize  the  investigation.    Black  concurring, regretted  that
the  Court  had  not  taken  the  position  he  urged  in  the  Bar-
enblatt   case   and  held  the   Committee's  witch-hunting   in
violation  of  the  First Amendment.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June 80,1956
McNamara's  One  Concrete  Suggestion  Is  Universal  Military  Service
(Continued  from  Page One)
ostensibly  for  the  use  of  high   school   debaters,  the   Defense
Department   argues   that   military   assistance  enables   us   "to
communicate  to  the  military  sector  in  developing  nations  a
clear  concept  of  the  part  it  can  and  should  play in  a democratic
society."  Like Gastelo  Branco  in  Brazil, for  example?    Or  Ky?
The   Pentagon   pamphlet   says  military  assistance  enables  us
to  bring  10,000  foreign  military  students  here  a  year,  "the
coming   leaders   of   their  nation."     Some  may  look   to   their
own  people  like  U.S. trained  oppressors.     Others  may  turn
against  us;  the  two  leaders  of  the  Guatemalan  guerrillas  are
military  men  who  went  through  the  U.S. Infantry  School  at'
Ft.  Benning,  Ga:    Or  the  people   at  home  may  not  like  the
gifts  we  send  back  with  them.    When  a  plane  appeared  over-
head  and  the  Post  writers  failed  quickly  to  hide,  a   guerrilla
jeered  at  them,  "You  wanna get  cooked  by your  own napalm."
There  is  a limit to  the  triumphs  of  technology.    Even  Canutes
armed  with  napalm  may  not  forever  quench  the  tides.
Toward  A  Garrison  State
We   wish  Secretary  McNamara  .would  take  tihie  off  from
improving  his  image  by quoting  St.  Augustine  and  T.  S. Eliot
and  give  us  the  benefit   of  his  thinking  on  these  problems.
In  his  speech  at  Montreal  he  opposed  the  idea  of  having  the
U.S.  act as  "a  global  gendarme"  but  that has  been  the  spirit of
our  policy  ever  since  the  Truman  Doctrine.    Indeed  the  De-
fense  Department  quotes  Truman  as  the  ultimate  source  for
the  military  assistance  program  under  which  (it  boasts)  we
have  given  arms  to  80  .nations—no  less!.   The   Pentagon's
clinching  argument  lor  military  assistance in  high  school  de-
bates  is  that  in  the  absence  of  these  satellite  foreign  armies
we  would  have to  police  the  world  ourselves  and  that  "would
prevent  many high  school  students from  going  on  to  college."
McNamara  said  at  Montreal  that  "the decisive  factor  for  a
nation  already  adequately  armed  is  the  character  of   its  rela-
tionship  to  the  world."     It  is  this  relationship  which  needs
changing.    Must  we  put  down  popular  rebellions  wherever
they  occur?    If  it  takes  a  million  men  to  win  the  Vietnamese
war,  how  many  more  will  we  need  if  the  bell  rings  in  Guate-
mala  or  Brazil?    The  one  concrete  proposal   to  appear   amid
Toward  Equal  Justice
Mr.  Justice  White was,  of  course,  correct  when  he ob-
jected  in  the Miranda case  that  the  history  of  the  privi-
lege  against   self-incriminatipn  provides  "no  significant
support"  for  the  new  rules  laid  down  by  Chief  Justice
Warren  on  police  interrogation.     The  majority  opinion
put  new  meaning  into  old  formulas,  but  it  can  hardly
be  denied  that  it  was  in  accord  with  the  spirit  of  the
privilege  and  of  the  Fifth  amendment.    The  new  deci-
sion  marks  a  noble  step  forward  toward  equal   justice.
The  Negro,  the  Puerto  Rican,  the  poorer  elements   of
our  society,  are  the  ones  which  have  been  victimized
by   back-room   police   interrogation.      It   is    indicative
that  Police   Chief  Parker  of   Los  Angeles  had  already
protested  against  the  idea  that  police  could  not  use  a
confession  unless  they  first  proved  that  "the defendant
was  apprised  of  his  constitutional  guarantees  of  silence
and  legal  counsel  and  that  he  intelligently  waived  these
guarantees."    This  is  exactly  what  the  Court  has  ruled.
Arthur  Krock  in  the  New   York  Times   (June   14)   re-
flected  the  views  of  the  country  club  set  when  he pro-
tested   that   this   would   "put immunity  from   punish-
ment  for  crime  on  a  wholesale  basis."   This  is  hyster-
ical.    The  decision  does  little  more  than  put  into  law
the  best  police   practice   here  and  abroad.    Indeed   the
practice  often   degenerates  into  hollow  formula.    The
ACLU  is  right  in  urging  a  stronger   rule,  allowing  in-
terrogation  only  in  the  presence  of  counsel.    The  way
to  civilize  the  human  jungle  in  our  urban  slums  is  to
set  a  civilized  example,  not  to  give  sick  human  animals
an  inner  sense  of   justification  by   making   them   feel
there  is  one  law  for  the  rich  and white,  another  for  the
poor  and  colored.     One  way  to  cut  down  crime  is   to
cut  down this  resentment.    The  Chief  Justice  has  set-up
another  landmark  in  the  law.   It  reflects  the  same  com-
passionate   insight   which  gave  us  the  Brown  decision.
We  also  applaud  the  Court's  decision  giving   literacy
in   Spanish   equal   weight   with  literacy   in  English   in
voting  requirements.    A  nation  of  nations  could  do  no
less  for  its  many  citizens  of  Hispanic  origin.
the  soothing  liberal  generalizations  in  McNamara's  Montreal
speech  was  a  call  for  universal  military  service.    We'll  need
it  if  the  present  policy  continues.    Even  a  wholly  militarized
America  will  not  prove  strong  enough   in  the   long   run   to
impose  its  will  on  a  rising  sea  of  discontent.
You  Con  Still Start  A  Gift  Sub With  Stone's  Four On-the-Spot   Reports  from  Vietnam  and  Cambodia
(They'll  Soon   Be  Exhausted)
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly     5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................:...........'....................................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte....................
6/20/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fi/tUt
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday   except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December  and  Uu
first  week  in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.. Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published   and  edited
by  I.  F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   *6   in   the  U.S.:   $6   in   Canada;    510   elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED