I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966mar14.pdf

============================================================

The  du  Bois Clubs and  Freedom  of  Dissent,  P.  2
Lighter  Moments  of  the  Washington  Establishment in the  Johnson  Era
Arthur  Schlesinger,  Jr.,  Sen.  and  Mrs.  Frank  Church,  the
Spanish  Ambassador   and  the   Marquesa  de  Merry  del  Val
and  Kuwait  Ambassador  and  Mrs. AI-Ghoussein  were  among
those  joining  in  the  laughter  at  another  skit  featuring  Bat-
man  as  "The  one  secret  weapon  the  President  and  he  alone
has   the   power   to   use."      When   Jack   Valenti,   dressed   as
Itobin,  rushes  out  on  the  stage  and  tells  Batman  the  presi-
dent  wants  to  send  both  of  them  to  Vietnam,  Batman   ex-
claims,  "He  must  be  out  of  his  mind!    Why  don't  you  send
General   Gavin—I   see.      Yes,   Chief,   if   you   say   so.      (He
turns  to  Robin)  He  says  if   we  don't   go  to  Vietnam  he'll
pre-empt  our  television  time."
—"MS   (Multiple   Sclerosis   benefit)    Show   Turns  Into   A
Side-Splitter,"    Washington   Star  Society   page,  March  5.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  10
MARCH  14,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
16   CENTS
If  We  Drop  The  Bombs  on  China
The  key  to  the  drift   toward  war  with  China  is  the  com-
fortable  assumption  that  in  case  of  need  we  can—in  the  im-
becile  jargon   of  the   Pentagon   —   "drop  the  Nuks."     The
"Nuks"  are,  of  course,  nuclear  weapons.  They  are  counted  on
to  save us from  the  giant  task  of  slugging  it  out  on  the  ground
with  a  country   10,000  miles  away  and   a  population   almost
four  times  our  own.    This  could  bleed  our  best  youth  for  a
generation   in  a  new  and  more  terrible  Thirty  Years'   War.
Three  factors  are  excluded  from  these  smug  genocidal calcula-
tions,  and  the  Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee  ought  to
look   into  them   in   its  current  China  hearings.     The  first  is
what  a  nuclear  attack  on  China  would  do  to  the  menace  of
radioactivity  world-wide.   The  second  is  the  radioactive dam-
age  it  might   impose   on   China's   neighbors,   our   allies,   and
especially  on  Japan.    The  third  is  that.the  nuclear  weapon  is
weakest  and  no  substitute  for  ground   forces  in  dealing  with
widely  dispersed  agrarian  societies  like  China.
The  Retribution  We  Risk
One  scientist  the  Committee  ought  to  call  is  Dr.  Ralph  E.
Lapp.    Last  spring  Life   Magazine  commissioned  him  to  do  a
preview  of  a  nuclear  attack  on  China.    In  the  days  when  Dr.
Lapp  was  a  pioneer  in  awakening  the  public  to  the  danger  of
fallout,  Life   was  unfriendly to  him.    Henry  Luce's  hero  then
was  Dr.  Teller  and  the  scientific  Dr.   Strangeloves  who  were
telling  us  that  we  had  nothing  to  fear  from  continued  testing
in  the  atmosphere.     But  when  Life   wanted  a  nuclear  expert
whose  views  commanded   respect   to  throw   a  scare  into  the
Chinese,  it  picked  Dr.   Lapp.     He  sketched   out  an  attack  in
the  late  60s  (Life,   May  28,  1965)   in  which  200  B-52s,  each
carrying  two  25-megaton  bombs,  dropped   10,000  megatons  on
China.    This  would  have  to  be  largely  by  "surface"  bursts  to
maximize  radioactivity  as  a  population   killer.     This   would,
then,   Dr.   Lapp  wrote,  kill   350,000,000   Chinese—or   about
half  its  people—and  severely  injure  100  million  more.    What
he  did  not  discuss,  and  what  Life   did  not  want  discussed,  be-
cause  that  would  scare  Americans,  loo,  is  what  the  explosion
of  10,000  megatons  would  do  to  world  fallout.    The  total  of
all  atmospheric  tests  was  about   500  megatons,   arid  we  still
don't  know  what  that  has  done  to  world  health.    A  10,000
megaton  bombardment  of  China  would   increase  world   radio-
activity  by  20  times  or  more.    And  if  the  momentum  of  war
How   Can  McNamara  Be  So  Blind?
After  his  appearance  in  executive  session  before  the
Senate   Foreign   Relations  Committee  March  3,   Secre-
tary  McNamara  released  to  the  press  his  prepared  re-
sponses   to   ten   basic   questions    about   the   war.     We
invite   attention   to   his   answer   to   the   first   question,
"What  is  the  true  nature  of  the  conflict  in  South  Viet-
nam?"    To  read  it  is  to  make  one  feel   that  Mr.  Mc-
Namara  is  nowhere  near  as  bright  as  he  is  cracked  up
to  be.    For  he  paints   the   war,   without   qualification
whatsoever,  as  simply  and  purely  a  case  of  aggression
from  the  north.  The  hold  of  the  Viet  Cong  is  attributed
entirely  to  terror.    It  would  be  hard  to  find  a  single
scholar  in  the  field  who  would  support   such   sweepingly
unqualified  statements.    They  recall  the  remark   quoted
by   David   Halberstam   in   his   book   on   Vietnam   that
McNamara  understands  everything  but  men  and  ideas.
Unfortunately  that  is  what  the  war  is  all  about.    Mc-
Namara's   appalling  oversimplifications  raise   the   most
serious   questions.     If   we  are  confronted   merely  with
aggression   and   terror,   why   did   so   many   American
officials  over  the  years  press  Diem  for  social   and  eco-
nomic  reforms  to  win  the  people  from  the  Viet  Cong?
Why  did  Johnson   press  Ky  for  such  reforms  at   Hono-
lulu?
seized  us  we  could  drop  much  more  on  China.    We  have,  we
learned   at   the   Pentagon,   roughly   600   B-52s.    With   those
alone,  without  counting  the  missiles,  we  could  dump   30,000
megatons  on  China.   No  one  knows  how  many  people  would
die  from  cancer  elsewhere  as  a  result  of  the  fallout  in  a  kind
of  cosmic  retribution  for  the  suffering  imposed  on  China.
The  country  most  in  danger,  meteorologists  tell  us,  would
be Japan.   The  winds  in North  China  above  the  30th parallel
blow  west  to  east.    Japan  is  in  their  path.    The  surface  bursts
necessary  as a population  killer  would  move westward with  the
winds.    Depending  on  the  winds,  these  deadly clouds  of  local
fallout  would  travel  anywhere from  200  to  1,000  miles.  From
Shanghai  to  the  nearest  part  of  southern  Japan  would  be  about
550  miles.   What  the  intermediate fallout  might  do  elsewhere
in  adjoining  Asia,  particularly in  the  Southeast  with  its  freak
monsoon   wind  patterns,  nobody  knows.    There  would.   Dr.
Lapp  informed  us,  be  "acute  danger"  to  Japan.
The  problem  is  made  the  more  difficult,  Dr.  Lapp   explains,
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March U, 1966
The Attorney  General  Mixes  The  Fallacious  With  The  Disingenuous
Why   The  Attack  on  the  Du  Bois Clubs  Is An  Attack  on  Freedom of Debate
The  Secretary General of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Jew-
ish  Community in Germany, Dr.  Hendrik  van  Dam,  comment-
ing  on  the  indifference  of  the  West  German  press  to  an  official
report  showing  neo-Nazi  activities  on  the  increase, said,  "Most
people  in  Germany  are  blind  in  the  right  eye."     (New    York
Times,  March  6).    The  United  States,  too,  seems  to  be  blind
in  the  right  eye.    While  all  kinds  of   Fascistic  organizations
flourish  on  the  right,  from  Birchites  to  Minutemen,  the  only
time  the  government  ever  acts  against  "subversion"   is  on  the
Left,  though   the  revolutionary left   is  minuscule  compared   to
the  conspiratorial  and  anti-democratic right.
Birchites  Strangely  Invisible
We're  not   advocating'  the  suppression   of   anyone's  views.
We're  just  noting  a  fact  of   life.     The   Birchites  and  half   a
dozen   varieties  of  "Christian"  organizations have  no  trouble
spreading  all  kinds  of  un-American  and  anti-Semitic paranoias
on  the  radio.    Klansmen  make  bombs  and  Minutemen  train
with  guns.    But  the  FBI  and  the  government  are  notoriously
blind  to  the  right-wing  activities.    It's  only  where  Leftists  are
concerned   that  they  go  into  action,  as  the  Attorney  General
did  in  the  case  against  the  W.E.B.  du  Bois  Clubs.
We  don't  like  the  du  Bois  clubs.    They're   the  stale   Old
Left,  not  the  New.     W.   E.  B.  du  Bois  was  one  of  the  great
Negroes  of  our  time.    But  he  came  back  from  his  education
in  Germany  before  World  War   I  with  the  temperament  of  a
Prussian.    He  was  authoritarian and  Stalinist  by  instinct  long
before  he  joined  the  Communist   Party.    He  was  prepared  to
accept   and   rationalize   all   the   repressions  and   horrors   com-
mitted  by Stalin  in  the  name  of  socialism, and  the  clubs  which
bear  his  name  have  the  same  orientation.    We   saw  a  whole
generation   of  radicals  swallow  the  most  monumental   lies  out
of  Moscow,  and  we  hate  to  see young  people  recruited  to  the
same  kind  of  subservience to  neo-Stalinist  party   line.
But  what  one  thinks  of  the  du  Bois  Clubs  is  irrelevant  to
the  action  begun  against  it  by  the  government.     Every  prin-
cipled   liberal  and   radical  must  support  them   in  their  fight
against  the  petition file-1 by  the  Attorney  General.    This  is
the  first  line of  battle  against  any  attempt  to  revive  McCarthy-
ism  as  a  way  of  intimidating  those  who  oppose  the  war.    Mr.
Katzenbach's   statement  defending   the   action   combines   the
fallacious  with  the disingenuous.
"Historically,"  the  Attorney  General  said,  "Americans  have
the  freedom  to  organize  in  dissent.    At  the  same  time,  in  ac-
cordance  with  the  law,  young  people  who  might  consider  join-
ing  this  organization are  entitled  to  know  its nature  and  spon-
sorship.    This  is  a  disclosure,  not  a  criminal  action.   Registra-
tion  does  not  imply  illegality and  does  not  curtail  an  organi-
zation's  activities. ..."
Mr.   Katzenbach  knows   better.     The   Subversive  Activities
Control  Act  of  1950,  as  Truman  protested   in  his  unsuccessful
veto,  is  an  attempt  to  limit  freedom  of  dissent.  Young  people
do  not  need  the  FBI or  the  Attorney  General  to  let  them  know
what  they  are  joining.    Just  where  the  du  Bois  Clubs   stand
in  the  spectrum  of  the  Left  is  well  understood.    Those  who
agree with  the  Clubs  have  a  right  to  join  them.    The  effort  to
make  the  Clubs  register  with  the  Subversive  Activities  Control
Board  is  more  than  a  disclosure  move.    The  act  denies  many
An  Easy  64-Piastre  Question
"One  prime  task  of  a  pacification team  is  to  under-
take  'census  grievance,'  in  which  they  attempt  to  learn
from   the  peasants   what  are  the   real  complaints  and
aspirations  of  a  hamlet.   If  a  real complaint is  the  per-
formance  of  a  district or  province chief,  what  happens
next?"
—Charles  Mohr   from   Saigon   "Pacification   Will   Be
A  Long  Hard   Road"  in  New   York   Times,  March  6.
You  shoot  the  complainer  as  a  suspected   Red.
rights  to  members  of  registered   organizations,  from  the  right
to  travel  to  the  right  to  work  in  defense  plants.    Registration
implies  illegality  and  was  intended  by Nixon  and  Mundt,  the
original  sponsors   of   this  law,  to  create   an   official   blacklist,
subjecting  those  on  it  to  ostracism  and   loss  of   employment.
Registration  does  curtail  activity  because  it  requires  the  regis-
tered  organization  to  label  its  publications  and  broadcasts  as
"communistic."    Registration  is  calculated  to  put  them  out  of
business  and  make  marked  men  of  their   members.
The  damage  is  not  limited to  the  du  Bois  Clubs.     It  must
cast  a  pall  on  all  dissent  from  the  Left,  and  was  so  intended.
The  Act's  modus  operandi  had  its  roots  in  the  failure  of  the
government  to  find  evidence  that   the  Communists   were  en-
gaged  in  any  illegal  activities—as  Klansmen,  for  example,   are
when  they  make  bombs.    Nor   was  the  government   able   to
muster  the  evidence  required  to  prove  the  Communists   agents
of  Moscow  under  the  Foreign  Agents  Registration  Act.    So
the  1950  Act  was  based  on  parallelism  of  opinion.     Registra-
tion  was  required  where  an  organization's  opinions   paralleled
those  of   Moscow.
Conviction  by  Parallelism
The  trouble  with  conviction   by  parallelism  should   be  clear
from  the  Attorney  General's  petition.    This  cites,  as  proof  of
Communist  domination  over  the  du  Bois  Clubs,  the  positions
they  have  taken  "on  nuclear  testing,  alleged  colonial  and  neo-
colonial   exploitation,   the   institution  of   diplomatic   relations
with  the  People's  Republic  of  China  and  with  Cuba,  the  ad-
mission  of  China  to  the  United  Nations,  the  removal  of   the
U.S.  Naval   Base  from  Guantanamo,  and  the  lifting  of   travel
restrictions  to  Cuba,  China  and  North   Vietnam."
Many  people  in  the  political  center  and  even  some  on  the
moderate  right  hold  one  or  several  of  these  views.    How  much
parallelism  must  there  be  to  make  one  suspect?    Is  it  a  free
society  when  the  government  by  such  actions  can  put  certain
opinions  outside  the  pale?    Does  this  not  put  the  country  on
notice  that  it  is  dangerous   to  hold  certain  opinions?     What
McCarthy  and  the  Un-American  Activities Committee  tried  to
do  by  putting  people  in  the  pillory  before  Congressional   in-
vestigators,  the  government   is  again  trying  to  do  by  bringing
the   du   Bois  Clubs   before   the  Subversive  Activities  Control
Board.    The  very  name  of  this  monstrosity  is  alien  to  a  free
society.   What  seems  subversive  to  one  man  may  seem   deeply
loyal  to  another.    The  truth  was  supposed  to  be  determined
by   free   discussion,   not   by  government   blacklisting.    What
poorer  way  to  win  back  alienated  youth  than  by  engaging  in
such  efforts  at  thought  control?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  U,  1!>H6
How  "Pacification"  May Be  Used  to  Ensure  Saigon's  Victory  in  Any  Vietnam  Poll
Guatemala  Shows  How  to  Make  A  Cynical  Farce  of  Free  Elections
We  must  leave  our  comment  on  the  outcome  of  the  Guate-
malan  elections  until  next  week,  when  final  returns  are  avail-
able.    In  the  meantime  it  is  worth  examining into  the  back-
ground  of  these  "free  elections,"  the  first  since  1958,  to  see
how   the  transition  from  military  dictatorship  can  be  accom-
plished   with  minimum  risk  to  U.S.   interests  and  their  native
allies,  in  a  colonial  country  like  Guatemala under  our  domi-
nation.
"Framing"   A  Constitution
In  the  first  place  the  elections are  being  held  under  a  new
constitution  drafted  by  a  Constituent  Assembly  of   80  mem-
bers.    Sixty  were  chosen  by  Guatemala's military  dictatorship.
Two   others   parties  were  allowed  to  nominate  ten  members
each,  but  their  nominees  too  had  to  be  approved  by  the  mili-
tary.    The  result was  a constitution which m.ikes  it  harder than
before   to   get   the   agrarian   reform   the   country   needs,   and
tightens  up  regulations  designed  to  prevent   free  organization
of   political  parties.
In  accordance  with  this  Constitution  not  only  Communists
and  Socialists  but  moderate  reformist  parties  like  the  Guate-
malan  Social  Party  and  the  Christian  Democrats,  were  barred
from  the  elections.  The  Christian  Democrats  were  founded  by
conservatives  after  our  CIA  helped  the  United  Fruit  Company
to  overthrow  Arbenz  in  1954  and  get  rid  of  his  agrarian  re-
form.    But  in  1964  the  party  was  taken  over  by  socially-mind-
ed  Catholics,  advocating  agrarian  reform  and   state  direction
of  the  economy.    Only  three  parties  were  allowed  to  take  part
in  the  election,  the  Institutional Democratic  Party,  formed  by
the  military  and   its  well-to-do  supporters;   the  Movement  of
National  Liberation,  a  rightist  split-off  group  within  the  upper
class  which  has  ruled  the  country  since  1954;  and  the  Revolu-
Democracy  in  Action—Brazilian  Style
Rio  de  Janeiro,  March  4—An  Army  colonel  was   re-
ported  today   to  have  forced   the  aldermen  of   a  small
town  in  Kio  de  Janeiro  state  to  elect  leaders  supported
by  him.   The  pro-government paper,  Jornal  do  Brasil,
said  the  colonel, commander of  an  armed  car  squadron,
surrounded   the   City   Hall  of   Barra  do  Pirai  with  800
men   and  presented  his   list   of  candidates.
The   action   took  place   a   few   days   after   President
Castello   Branco  had  declared  in  a   major   speech  that
democracy  existed  in  Brazil  and  said  the   fundamental
institutions  of  democracy were  being  preserved.
—lialtimorf   Sun's  own  Rio  bureau, March  5.
tionary   Party,  which  is  referred  to  as  "Leftist"   in  the   U.S.
press  but  cooperated  with  the  military  in  the  farce  of  the  Con-
stituent  Assembly.    Its   Leftism   is  indicated  by   its  advocacy
of   economic   development    supported    by   private    enterprise.
Even   if   its  candidate wins,  United  Fruit   need   not   fear   for
its  bananas.
We  may  be  sure  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Guatemala  played  its
part  in  this  "guided  '  democracy,  and  that  the  U.S.  Embassy
in  Saigon  will  see  its  applicability  in  South  Vietnam.    There
a  new  wrinkle  is  being  introduced  in  the  shape  of  the  CIA-
trained  "pacification"  squads.    Their  main  job  will  be  to  root
out  suspected  Viet  Cong  sympathizers  in  the  villages.    We'd
hate  to  see  CIA-trained   squads   allowed   to  determine   what
Americans  can  be  allowed  to  take  part  in  political   activity,
and  we  can  easily  imagine  the  results  in  Vietnam.    When  the
suspects   have  been   gotten   rid   of   and   the   rest  intimidated,
South  Vietnam,  too,  may  be  as  safe  as  Guatemala   for   "free
elections."
Time  to  Find  Out  Whether  Our  Government  Finances  Assassinations
Both  the  Senate  and  the  House  Appropriations   Committees
have  subcommittees  which  pass  on  the  CIA.    The  existence  of
these   subcommittees   is  always  cited   whenever   someone   pro-
poses  that  a  special  joint  committee  be  established   to  super-
vise  CIA  operations.    The  members  of  the  Senate   subcommit-
tee,  so  we  were  told   after   a  curious  delay  possibly  for  clear-
ance  higher-up,   are  Senators  Hayden,  Russell,  Saltonstall  and
Young  of  North  Dakota.    The  membership  of  the  House sub-
committee,  so  Chief   Clerk  Kenneth  Sprankle  informed  us,  is
a  secret.    We  suggest  that  members  of  the  House  and   Senate
who  have  campaigned   over  the  years  for  some   Congressional
check  on  CIA  activities,  ask  their  respective  subcommittees  to
investigate  and  report  on  the  communique  issued by the  Cuban
government   March   5  alleging  that  the  CIA  put  up  $100,000
in  a  plot  to  assassinate  Fidel  Castro.    The  U.S.  Embassy  offi-
cial  in  Madrid   alleged  to  have  handed   over  the  money  and
two  alleged   Cuban  employes  of  the  CIA  were  named.  There
is  no   reason   why  cither  or   both   of   the   CIA   subcommittees
could  not  at  least  stage  secret  hearings  and  report  publicly  to
the  Congress.     If  the  CIA  does  not  engage  in  assassination,  it
should  itself  welcome  such  investigation.
The  Cuban  government  in  the  past  has  proven   better   in-
formed  than  the  American  public  on  CIA  activities  aimed  to
overthrow  it.    We   believe  the  charges  should   be  taken  seri-
More  CIA  Dirty   Tricks?
Madrid   (AP)—Unexplained   and  continuing  mishaps
to  ships  being  built  for  Cuba in  Spanish yards suggests
that  anti-Castro  sabotage  is   involved.    In  one  year  5
ships  under  construction for  Cuba's  merchant  fleet  suf-
fered   damaging   "accidents"   in   which   four    Spanish
shipyard  workers  lost  their  lives  and  nine  suffered   in-
juries. ...  It  is  rumored  but unproven that anti-Castro
leader  Manuel  Artime  [the  CIA's  fair-haired  boy  at  the
Bay  of  Pigs—IFS]  has  recruited  agents  here  to  sabo-
tage  Castro's  ship-building program  in  Spain.
—Richard   Mowrer   in   York,   Pa.,  Gazette   &   Daily,
Mar.  7.
ously.    To  let  them  pass  without  a  demand  in  Congress   for
investigation  is  to  encourage  the  CIA  in  the  "dirty  tricks"  of
which  it  boasts.    There  are  many  in  Africa   who  blame   our
government   for  the  murder  of  Lumumba  and  many  in  South-
east   Asia  who   believe  we  encouraged   the  murder   of  Diem.
If  nothing  more,  a  demand  that  the  subcommittees  investigate
would  put  them  as well  as the  CIA  on  the  spot,  dramatize  the
weak  supervision  they  give  CIA  and  strengthen  the  case  for  a
special  supervisory  committee.    The   question   is  not   whether
the  U.S.  likes  Fidel  Castro  but  whether  we  are  so  far  gone  in
lawlessness  that  we  would   secretly  finance  his   murder.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  14,1966
Not  Strange  That  China,  Too, Wants  A  Nuclear  Deterrent
(Continued   from   Page One)
because  so  little  is  known  about  "intermediate"  fallout  in  the
1,000  mile  range.    We  know  a  good  deal  about  "local"  fall-
out,  which  may  extend  for  hundreds  of  miles.    We  know  a
good  deal  about  stratospheric  world-wide  fallout.    But  there
is  little  unclassified   material   at   least   on  the   "intermediate"
fallout.    This  and  the  "local"  fallout  would  represent  a  dan-
ger  of  unknown  dimensions  in  Japan.    This  is  why  we  pro-
posed   last  week—as  a  brake  on  the  war  machine—that  an
international  body  of  scientists  begin  a  study  of  what  various
levels  of  attack  on  China  would  do  to  the  adjoining  countries
and  to  the  world  health  picture.    Dr.  Lapp  began  urging  such
a  study  of  the  effects  of  nuclear  war  years ago.  The  Japanese,
for  their  own  safety,  ought  to  initiate  it  now.
No  Pushbutton   Victory
It  is our  hope,  in  opening  up  these  insane  perspectives  of  an
insane  world  order,  to  raise  the  pressure  for  peace  from  Japan
and  the  rest  of  Asia,  and  to  explode  the  delusion  that  if  worst
comes  to  the  worst  we  could  destroy  China  by  distant  push-
button  without  danger  to  ourselves  and our  allies.   This brings
us  to  the  third  factor,  China's   lesser  vulnerability  to  nuclear
attack.    In  this  year's  posture  hearings,   Secretary  McNamara
gave  some  figures  on  what  we  could  do  in  retaliation  if  the
Soviet  Union   attacked   first.   These  figures  show  how  much
more  vulnerable  the  Soviet  Union  is  than  China.     McNamara
speaks  of   destroying  one-third   the   population   and   one-half
the  industrial  capacity  of   the  Soviet  Union   in  an  attack  on
its major  urban  centers.    The  attack  he  sketches  on  50  Chinese
urban  centers  would  destroy half  China's  industry  but  only  50
million  of  its  700  to  800  million  people.     Very  dense  and
radioactively  "dirty"  bombing  is  needed  to  cripple  a  largely
rural  and  agrarian  society  like  China's.  It  could  carry on  guer-
rilla  war  for  years  even  after   destruction  of  its  cities.     The
level  of  nuclear  attack  necessary  really  to  destroy  China  would
create  a  radioactive menace to  Japan  and  a  world  health  prob-
lem.     If  such  considerations  impose  limits  on  nuclear  attack,
we  confront  the  formidable task  of  occupying  China  and  sub-
duing  its  superior  numbers.   This  is  where  we  are  being  led
in  that  "open-ended"  conflict  in  Asia  against  which  the  Mans-
Marines  Let  Slip  What  Rusk  Tries  to  Deny
Sec.   RUSK:   We  are   not   putting  ourselves   in   the
position  of  the gendarmes  of  the  universe.  .  .  .  We are
not trying to  impose a  Pax Americana on the world.. ..
Sen.   FULBRIGHT:  You  deny  that  there  is   a  Pax
Americana,  but  the  fact  is  we  have  troops  in  Europe,
Korea,  Vietnam  and  the  Dominican Republic.   We  have
military  missions  in  half  the  nations  of  the  word.  .  .  .
Sen.  AIKEN:  And  are  we  bound  to  fight  communism
wherever  it  exists?
Sec.  RUSK: No, sir,  no sir.  .  .  .  What  we  are talking
about  Senator  is  that  where  Communist  countries  un-
dertake  to  commit  aggression  against   those   to  whom
the  U.S. has   undertaken  a   clear  commitment  to  an
alliance,  that  there  we  have  a  duty  to  assist  our  allies.
Sen.  AIKEN:  That  would  include what,  about  80  or
90  countries  in  the  world?
Sec.  RUSK: No, sir.  This  would  include just  over 40
countries.
Sen.  AIKEN:  Only  40?
Sec.  RUSK: That  is  right.
—Sen. For. Relations hearings  on Vietnam,  Part  1.
<:
U.S.  MARINES  WANT  YOU.    The   Pax  Romana
was  the  longest  period of  tranquillity  the  civilized world
has  ever  known.    This  peace  was  won  and maintained
by  the  Roman  citizen  soldier  who,  in  the  time  of  need,
came  to  the  aid  of  his  nation.   Today  the  Marine  Corps
needs  its  citizen  soldiers,  its  Reservists,  to  come  to  the
aid  of  our  nation  and  the  free  world."
—Page  1 appeal  in  The  Reserve  Marine, Jan. 1966.
field  report  warned  us.
Secretary  McNamara   told  the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic
Energy   at   the   hearings  on   non-proliferation  March   7   that
China  was  imposing  hunger  on  its  people  to  develop  nuclear
weapons.     But  it  is  the  fear  of  attack  from   us  which  leads
China  to  strain  every  muscle  in  this  task.    Our  military  phil-
osophy  is  based  on  nuclear  deterrence.     It  is  the  mutual  bal-
ance  of   terror  that  keeps   us  and   the  Russians  at  a   fearful
standoff.    The  Chinese  want  the  deterrent,  too.  They  have
far  more  reason  to  fear  us  than  we  have  to  fear  them.    They
are  only  striving  to  apply  the  murderous  lesson  we  are  teach-
ing.   It's McNamara-ism  not  Marxism-Leninism.
We'll  Be Clod to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly     5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   .........................."................Zane............State....................
8/14/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sab  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............St*te....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Ftftie*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  O
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Wuhintton,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week  In  December  and   Ihe
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  Independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   *6   in   the  U.S.; *6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED