I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966oct10.pdf

============================================================

How  to Hide Possible  Peace  Signals,  P.  2
Say  That  Again?    How  to  Be  Lawful  Though Lawless  in  One Easy Lesson
"Thailand  has  become  America's  main  air  base  for  war
against   North  Vietnam.    Officially,   according  to  the  Thai
government,   the   U.S.   planes  do  not   exist.     Officially   no
raids  are  made  from  Thai  soil.    Neither  country   considers
she  is  violating  international  law  as  no  war  has  been  de-
clared  on  North  Vietnam."
—"LBJ's  Secret  Second  Front,"  Arthur  Cook  from  Bang-
kok  in  the  London  Daily  Mail,  Sept.  21.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  31
October   10,  1966
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
A Widening  Gulf  and  A  Deepening  Despair
A  terrible  gulf   is  opening  in  our  country.    The  victory  of
Maddox  over  Arnall  in  the  Georgia   Democratic   primary   is
only  the  latest  evidence that  leadership  is  slipping  to  the  poor
white know-nothings in  the  South.    Those  who  talk  so scorn-
fully   about  middle  class  liberals  and  want  a  working   class
third  party might  reflect  on  the  fact  that  in  the  North  as  well
as  the  South   the  bitterest  resistance  to  the  Negro's   struggle
comes   from  the  white  working  class.     And  those  who  are
making  a  slogan  of  "the  unrepresented  people"  might  notice
that  the  racists  of  Grenada  and  Cicero  also  feel   unrepresented
by   the   Congresses   which  have  passed   so  much   civil   rights
legislation.     Maddox's  ax  handles  are  as  emotionally   satisfy-
ing  a  symbol  to  these  whites  as  Carmichael's  black  panther  is
to  many  Negroes.    Both  symbols  point  in  the  same  direction,
to  racial  war.    We  fight  a  civil  war  abroad  while  one  grows
up  at  home.
The  New  Secessionists
A  new  kind  of  secession  is  in  the  air.    Not  the  simple  ter-
ritorial  division,  relatively easy to  heal,  which  created  the  Con-
federacy  but  a  less  tangible  secession  more  dangerous   to  the
social  fabric.    There  are  an  increasing  number  on  right  and
left,   among  white  and  black,  who  would  like  to  opt  out—
just  where  they  do  not  know,  but  out.    There  is  not  only  a
readiness  to  tear  down  the  pillars  of   society  if   they   cannot
obtain  satisfaction,  but  even  a  perverse  hope  that  all  will  fail.
Behind  the  cry  of  black  power,  for   all  its  smoother   exposi-
tion  for  white  sympathizers,  lies  an  emotional   urge  to   sepa-
rate.   The  savagery  in  Grenada  and  Cicero  reflects a  readiness
to  get  rid  of  blacks  altogether  if  they  try  to  come  out  from
behind  their  ghetto  walls.    All  the  bestial  hate  that  created
the  crematorium  can  be  read  in  the  face  of  white  mobsters.
I  shuddered  to  hear  a  sociologist  say  at  the  opening   of  an
NBC  show  last  Sunday night  on  the  race  troubles  of  Chicago
and  Cleveland  that  we  must  either  make  the  huge  effort  re-
quired  to  give  the  Negro  real  equality  or  exterminate  him.
He  meant  this  as  an  impossible  and  unbelievable  alternative.
But   anything  can  happen   if   demagogues,   black  and   white,
preach  hate  long   enough.
To  the  secessionists  of  race  must  be  added  the  secessionists
of  politics.    Much  of  the  New  Left  politics  is  an  attempt  in
disillusion  to  secede  from  the  American political  system.  The
New  Left  convention  in  Los  Angeles  last  week-end  is  a warn-
ing  of  what  may  happen  nationally  in  two  years  time.    From
A   Bombing   Pause  So  Limited   It's  Almost  Invisible
Don't  Times  Editors  Read  Their  Own  Paper?
'The  orders  issued  last  week  for  a  limited  pause  in
U.S.  bombing of  the  demilitarized  zone  .  .  .  represent  a
useful  reinforcement  of  the  peace  offensive  that  began
with  Ambassador  Goldberg's  speech.  .  .  ."
—"Climate  for  Negotiation"   Times  editorial  Oct.  2
"Saigon,  Sept.  30—A  pause  in  the  bombing  of  part
of  the  demilitarized zone  by  U.S.  planes  has  been  or-
dered  to  encourage  renewed  international  patrolling  of
the  buffer  zone.  .  .  .  For  several  days  American bomb-
ers  have  been  forbidden  to   bomb  in  the  southeastern
corner  of  the  zone.  .  . . The sources  here  echoed  denials
in   Washington   that   any   general   bombing  pause   had
been  ordered.  .  .  . There  had been  speculation  that  such
a  military  'stand  down'  might  be  ordered ...  to  give
the  Hanoi  regime  a  better atmosphere  in  which  to  con-
sider  the  U.S.  representative's  offer  [at  the  UNL  .  .  .
The bombing pause  in  a  small  part  of  the demilitarized
zone  might  have  caused  confusion  on  this  score.  .  .  ."
—Charles Mohr,  Saigon,  in New  York  Times  Oct. 1
a  distance  the  observer  is  appalled  at  the  notion  of  what  Rea-
gan's   defeat  of   Brown   for   the   Governorship   could   do   to
American  politics.    But  California  liberals  and  Leftists  are  as
disgusted  with  Brown  as  most  of  us  in  the  country  are  with
Lyndon  Johnson.    To  read  the  brilliant and  exhaustive  indict-
ment  of  Brown  in  the  October  Ramparts  is  to  understand  the
furious  sense  of  being  sold  out  that  made  the  New  Left  wash
its  hands  of   Brown   even  though   this  may  mean   a  rightist
victory.   This  is the  mood  in  which  many  people  are  going  to
sit  out  the  1968  campaign.    It's  going  to  be hard  to  sell  them
Lyndon  Johnson  again  as  a  lesser  evil  even  if  the  Republicans
—as  now  appears—run  on  a  platform  calling  for  A-bombs  in
Vietnam  and  more  police  clubs  at  home.
Even  if  Kennedy   is  on   the  ticket  who   will  believe   that
Johnson  will  not  again  adopt  the  program  against  which  he
campaigned?    Only  peace  in  Vietnam  can  re-unite  the  ranks
left-of-centre   and  leave  our  energies  free  to  close  the  racial
gulf  at  home.    Only  peace  can  end  the  fearful   alienation  of
so  many  of  our  best  intellectuals,  black  and  white,  men  who
could  do  so  much  in  the  urgent  tasks  of  social  reconstruction
if   once  recalled  from   the  wilderness  of  their  own  self-exile
in  revulsion  against  Johnson's  barbarous war.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

l.T.  Stone's Weekly,  October  10, 1966
Ike's  Reiterated  Call  for  "Any  Weapon"  in  Vietnam  A  Grave  Development
How   to  Etide  Possible  Peace  Signals   From  Public  Attention
PEACE  SIGNALS  HUSHED  UP  AGAIN:  Two  days  after
Goldberg's  speech   at  the  UN,   Premier  Pham  Van  Dong  of
North  Vietnam  made  a  speech  to  a  visiting  Czech   delegation
which  diplomats  in  Hanoi  regarded  as  hopeful:   he  did   not
ask  prior  withdrawal of  U.S. troops  as  a  condition  for   peace
talks  and  he  asked  only  that  the  Viet  Cong  be  accepted  as  an
"interlocutor"  in  negotiations,  not  as  the  sole,  legitimate rep-
resentative of  the  South  Vietnamese  people.   This  made  head-
lines  in  Le  Monde   and  Le  Figaro  in  Paris  (Sept.  27).    But
until  these  French  papers  arrived  several  days  later  there  was
no  clear  indication  in  the  U.S. press  of  just  what  Pham  Van
Dong  had  said.     Here   a  State  Department   "backgrounder"
Sept.   26  quickly  disparaged   the   speech   and   said   it   showed
"no  discernible change"  in  Hanoi's position  (NYT  next  day).
Even  Goldberg  in  the   Dark
When  I  tried  to  learn just  what  Pham  Van  Dong  had  said,
I  found  that  the  text  had  been  omitted  from  that  day's  foreign
broadcast   monitoring  service  available  at   State   Department.
To  accent  the  negative  it  carried  only  some  Hanoi   newspaper
attacks  on  the  Goldberg  speech.     I  found  later  that  the  text
was  available  that  day  but  in  a  restricted  form  for  official  use
only.    The  text  seems  to  have  been  kept  even  from   Goldberg
because  when  he  came  to  Washington  several   days  later  and
talked  with  reporters  at  the  White   House  he  referred   hope-
fully  to  the  French  press  reports  about  the  speech  from  Hanoi
and  not  to  the  text  itself,  which was  much  clearer.    The   swift
burial  of  these  possible  peace  signals  was typical.
While  LBJ  is  pictured  as  desperately  scanning  the  horizon
for   any  possible  sign   of   peace,   the   Administration  rapidly
knocks  down  any  signals  which  come  into  view.    Four  days
after  Pham  Van  Dong  spoke,  Hanoi  pointedly  rebroadcast  in
English  a  National  Liberation  Front  interview with   Wilfred
Burchett  (made  available  a  month  earlier,  in  Vietnamese  by
the  NLF's  clandestine  radio)  which  invited  "all social  strata,
nationalities,   religious  communities  and   patriotic  personali-
ties"  to  join  in  a  broad  front  coalition  government  for  South
Vietnam.    Only  the  heads  of  the  present  military  junta  were
excluded.     Add  this  proposal   for  a  broad  coalition  to  Pham
Van  Dong's  withdrawal of  the  demand  that  the  NLF  be  rec-
ognized   as  the   sole  spokesman   for   South   Vietnam  and  you
have  the  possibility  of  fruitful   negotiation.     But  this  too  is
knocked  down  at  State  Department  as  "nothing  new."  They
No  Wonder  Desertions  Are  So  High   When
This  Is  How  They   Recruit
Qui  Nhon,  Vietnam—A  299th  Engineer  Combat Bat-
talion  soldier,  who is  a  first  generation  Japanese  Amer-
ican,  recently  experienced   a  very  embarrassing  moment
when  he  was   mistakenly   drafted  into  the   Vietnamese
Army  at  Qui  Nhon.    As  Specialist  Four,  Alfred  B.  Lee,
20,  who  works  as  a  personnel   specialist  with  HQ  Com-
pany,  was  returning   from  pass  at  Qui  Nhon  recently.
He  noticed  a  Vietnamese   Army  truck  stopped    further
up  the  road,  with  a  serious  looking  ARVN soldier  wav-
ing  him  over  with  a  Ml  carbine.    The  civilian  clothes-
clad  specialist  followed  his  natural  instinct  and  accept-
ed  the  soldier's  invitation.    Lee  was  ushered   into  the
truck   in  which  several   Vietnamese   civilians   were   de-
jectedly   sitting.    By  virtue  of  sign  language,  he  then
realized  that  he  had  just   been  drafted   into  the   Army
of   the   Republic  of   South   Vietnam.    Fortunately   for
SP4  Lee, some  of  his  buddies,  who  had  been   watching
the  scene  from  inside  the  nearby   299th  Battalion  com-
pound,  rushed  down  the  road  with  the  Battalion  inter-
preter  and  saved   the  day  by  explaining   that   Lee  was
presently  on  active  duty  in  the  U.S. Army.
—The  Vietnam  Guardian  (Saigon)   last Aug.  3
won't  see anything new until Ho  Chi  Minh  turns  up  at  the  C
street  entrance  and  asks,  please,  where  can  he  surrender?
BEFORE  IT'S  TOO  LATE:  Now  is  the  time  to  rally  all
opposition   to  use  of  the  A-bomb  in  Vietnam.    One   cannot
exclude  the  possibility  that  Eisenhower  in  reiterating  his "any
weapon"   stand   is  speaking   at   the   suggestion   either   of   the
White   House   or  of   the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff.     Pastore,   no
dove,  but  chairman  of  the  Joint  Congressional   Committee  on
Atomic  Energy,  indicated this  possibility when  he  "implored"
Johnson,  McNamara,  Rusk  and  the  Joint  Chiefs  on  the Sen-
ate  floor  Oct. 4  "not to  maneuver  the  U.S. into  a  position
where  we  have  to  use  thermonuclear  weapons."
WHY  JUST  SHUT  OFF  AID  TO  ISRAEL?    The  latest
poll   by  Gallup   released    Sept.   21,   shows   Protestants   more
heavily  against  the  Vietnamese  war  than   Jews.    The   latter
split   41-41,   with   18%   no   opinion,   while   the   Protestants
43%  disapproved,   39%  approved  and  18%  had  no  opinion.
Only  Catholics  showed  a  majority  approving  the  -war  (54  to
31  with  15%   undecided).     We   suggest  the  White  House
let  it  be  known  there will  be  no  more  U.S. aid  for  Protestant
countries  until  Protestants  support  him  on  Vietnam.
OWNERSHIP,   MANAGEMENT   AND   CIRCULATION
I Act  of   October  23.  1962:  Section  4369.  Title  39.  United  States  Code)
1.  Date  of   Kiling:  September  30.  1966.
2.  Title  of  Publication:   I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.
3.   Frequency  of  issue:   Every  other   Monday  except  last  in  December  and
first   in  January  and  bi-weekly   in  July  and  August.
4.  Location  of  known  office  of  publication:  561S Nebraska  Avenue.   N.W..
Washington.  D.  C.  2001S.
5.  Ijocation   of   the   headquarters   or  general   business   offices   of   the   pub-
lishers:   5618   Nebraska   Avenue,  N.W..  Washington.   D.  C.  20015.
6.  Names  and  addresses  of  publisher,  editor,  and  managing  editor:   I.   F.
Stone,  same  address.
7.  Oyvner   (If   owned   by  a  partnership  or  other  unincorporated   firm,  its
name   and   addrens,   as   icell   aa   that   of   each   individual    mttxt   be   given):
I.    K.   Stone.   5618  Nebraska   Avenue.   N.    W..   Washington.   D.   C.   20015:
Ksther  M.  Stone,  same  address.
8.  Known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders owning  or
holding   1  percent  or  more  of   total   amount  of   bonds,   mortgages  or  oUier
securities   (If   there  are   none,  so  state):   none.
!t.  Paragraphs  7  and  8  include,  in  cases  where  the  stockholder  or   secur-
ity   holder   apl»r;trs  upon   the   books  of   the   company   as  "trustee  or   in   any
other  fiduciary  relation,  the  .name  of   the   person  or  corporation  for   whom
such  tristee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full   knowledge  and  belief   as  to  the  circumstances  and  conditions
under  which  stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company   as  trustees,  hold  stock   and  securities  in  a.  capacity
other  than  that  of  a  honafide  owner.
Average No.  Copies
Each  Issue During     Single Issue Nearest
Preceding  12 months         To Filing Date
A.  Total   No.   Copies   Printed                        30.954
B.  Paid  Circulation
1.  Sales Through  Agents,  News
Dealers   or  Otherwise                             1,!I33
2.  To  Term  Subscriliers  by
Mail.  Carrier Delivery,  or  by
other  means                                               27,217
C.  Total  Paid  Circulation                                              2<i.lr>0
I).   Kree  Distribution   (including
samples)  by  Mail.  Carrier  De-
livery,   or   by   Other   Means                              Kill)
K.  Total  No.  of  Copies  Distributed               29,950
K.  Office  Use,  Etc.                                           1.004
G.  Total                                                                            30.1154
33.000
2.064
29.704
31.770
50
31.830
1.170
33,000
I   certify   that   the   statements   made  by   me  above  are   correct   and   com-
plete.    I.  F.  Stone,  editor.
We  Thank  Readers   For This  Immensely  Cheering  30%   Increase  In  One  Year
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  10, 1966
Fulbright  Tries  to  Alert  the  Country  to  A  Dangerous  New  Theatre  of  War
More  U.S. Troops in Siam  Now  Than in  Vietnam When LBJ Began Bombing
The  most  striking  fact   presented   the  Senate  by  Fulbright
in  his  speech  on  Thailand last  Monday  is that  there  are  more
U.S.  troops  there  now  than  there  were  in  South  Vietnam  as
recently  as  Jan.  1,  1965,   just  before  Johnson  began  to  bomb
the North  and  pour  troops  into the South.   There were  23,000
U.S.  soldiers  in  South  Vietnam  then.    There  are  more  than
30,000  in  Thailand   now.    Much  of  the  money  poured   into
the  country  is  classified  but  Fulbright  estimates  that  economic
and  military  aid,  and  base  construction  costs,  are  well  over  a
billion  dollars.    Though  the  Thai  operation  is  shaping  up  as
a  possible  major  new  theatre  of  war,  government   officials  still
refuse  to  testify  in  public  about  it.   What  this  amounts  to  is
the  creation of  a  fait  accompli  in  Thailand,  undercutting  Con-
gress's  constitutional  right  to  make  the  decisions  of  war  or
peace.    The  Fulbright  speech  is  an  attempt  to  alert  the  coun-
try  in  time.
Duties  Sang  A  Different   Tune
The   State  Department's   favorite  new   excuse   for   putting
troops  into  Thailand,  as  into  Vietnam,  is  the  SEATO   treaty.
But  when  that  treaty  was  before  the   Senate   for   ratification
(as  Senator  Young  of  Ohio  recalled  on  the  floor  Sept.   28)
John  Foster  Dulles  said  "if  there  is a  revolutionary   movement
in  Vietnam  or  Thailand,"  under  the  SEATO  treaty  "we  have
no  undertaking to  put  it  down;  all  we  have  is  an  undertaking
to  consult  what  to  do  about   it."
Actually  the  treaty  calls  for  two  forms  of  consultation,  one
with  our  SEATO   allies,  since  the  treaty  provides  for   action
only  on  the  basis  of  unanimity,  and  secondly  with  the   Con-
gress  and  the  American  people  since  action  can  only  be  taken
"in  accordance  with  constitutional  processes."    Fulbright   said
it  was  ironical that  the  Senate  was  being  asked  to  give  its  ad-
vice  and  consent  to  trivial  treaties  with  Thailand  on  double
taxation  and  on  commerce  and  navigation  while  the  Admin-
istration  keeps  the  Senate  and  the  country  in  the  dark  on  such
huge  military preparations  and  the  secret  understandings  with
Thailand  which  make  them  possible.     Instead  of  being   equal
partners  with  the  President,  Fulbright  said,   Congress   is  be-
coming  his   instrument   "easily   and   compliantly—if   not   en-
thusiastically."
The  insurgency  in  the  poverty-stricken  northeast   of   Thai-
land  is said  to  be  the  reason  for  our  buildup.  But  "obviously,"
Fulbright  said,  "we   have  not   sent   25  or   30,000  men   and
hundreds  of  planes  to  Thailand,  and  obviously  we  are  not
building  multi-million  dollar  bases  capable   of  handling   the
largest  strategic  bombers  in  order   to  meet   a  threat   arising
from  'hundreds'  of  insurgents.   The  Thais  themselves  should
Somebody'd  Better  Start  Classifying  The
Wall  St.  Journal   As  Top  Secret
"He   [Fulbright]   felt   the   State   Department   would
discourse  volubly on  aid  to  Togoland—$13  million—but
not  on  the  buildup of  U.S.  forces  in  Thailand.    'Why,
they  say  there  are  no  B52  bases  in  Thailand,'  Fulbright
drawled,  'but  someone  sent  me an  ad  from  the  Wall  St.
Journal  where  one  of  those  big  construction  outfits  is
advertising  that  it's  doing  that.  .  .  .'    On  May  5  the
San  Francisco  edition  of  the  Journal  carried   m  two  col-
umn  classified  ad  by  Dillingham-Zachry-Kaiser   for   a
chief  photographer  and  a  public  relations  officer.    On
top  was  a  box  containing  the  words:  'We  are  construct-
ing  a  B-52  base and deep  water  port  in  South  Thailand,
approximately  100  miles  southeast   of   Bangkok.  .  .  .'
That  would  be  the  enormous   base  still  building  near
Sattahip  on  the  Gulf  of  Siam,  which  officially  belongs
to  Thailand's  Navy,  which according  to  a  recent  report
owned  one  plane."
—John  Maffre    in  the  Washington  Post  Sept. 28
be  able  to  handle  a  military threat  of  such  dimensions.   Thai-
land's  armed   forces   total   130,000  men—an  army  of   about
85,000;  a  navy  of  25,000  and  an  air  force  of  20,000—and
their  defense  budget  for  1965-66  was  over  $90  million."    In
any  case  all  this  military  hardware  is  irrelevant,  as  Fulbright
noted,  to  the  rural  discontent  on  which  the  insurgency   feeds.
All  the  errors  we  made  in  supporting  Diem  are  being  repeat-
ed.   We  are  establishing  another  military  protectorate  to  keep
another  Oriental   despotism   in  power.
At  the  UN  on  Sept.  27  the  Foreign  Minister  of  this  regime,
Thanat  Khoman,  seemed  to  be  anxious  to  gag  dissent  here  as
his government  does  at  home.    He  attacked  critics  of  the  Viet-
namese  war  in  Birchite  terms  as  those  "dissenting   minorities
.  . . from  legislative  quarters,  from  the press,  from  the  Church
and  from  the  uninformed  academic  circles"  who  "allow  them-
selves  to  be  carried  away  by  their  abstract  and  unrealistic  as-
sumptions  or  by their  belief  in  false liberalism...."  Even  more
extraordinary,  though  not  out  of  character  with  this,  was  his
excursion   into  Nazi-style  anti-Semitism.    He   attacked   those
"few  nations  in  Asia"  which  have  been  "deluded  into  believ-
ing  in  alien  doctrines  born  in  the  dark  recesses  of   European
ghettoes."    This  reads  as  if  taken   directly  out  of  Goebbels'
Voelkischer   Beobachter.     Ky   admires  Hitler   and   Khoman
seems  to  have  absorbed  Hitler  doctrines,  perhaps  during  the
World  War  II  days  when  Thailand  was  the  faithful   paid  ai!v
of  the  Axis.    We  seem  to  have  acquired  another  ci.-eer  nsr
ner  in  our  crusade  to  make  Asia  safe  for  democracy.
Conservative   Columnist  Back   From   Thailand   Says  Buildup  There  Is  Aimed  At  China
"An  abortive  closed  hearing  was  held  recently  in  Wash-
ington  on  the  big  American buildup  in  Thailand.  .  .  .  Sen-
ators   complained   they   could   learn   little   and   expressed
apprehension  that  B52  nuclear  bombers  would  be  placed  on
a  new  airfield   in  Thailand.    A  great  deal  can  be  learned
merely  by  going  to  Thailand  where  it  is  no  secret  that  the
American  buildup  is  occurring. .  .  .  Recently  the  Thai  gov-
ernment  permitted  the  release of  some background informa-
tion   on   the   U-Tapao  airfield,   which   has   a   2.1-mile   long
runway   that   Congressmen  fear   will   be   used   for  nuclear
I 2
bombers.  .  . .  Involvement with Thailand is  a  deep  and last-
ing  one,  and  the  Thais  keep  reminding  you  that  it  was  not
their  idea,  the  U.S.  asked  for  it.    Eventual  joint  and com-
bined  operations  of   the  Thai  forces  and  the   U.S.   against
the   Communist  forces   of   the   north   are   in  the   planning
stage.    The  Senate   should  know,   if   it   does  not  already,
that  the  buildup  in  Thailand far  exceeds  the  requirement of
fending  off  the  few  hundred  hard-core  Communist insurrec-
tionists   in  the  North.    The  Thailand  buildup  is  aimed  at
China."    —Richard  Wilson  in  the  Washington Star  Sept.    Stf
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 10, 196&
How  the  "Truth  in  Packaging"  Bill  Was  Gutted  By  An  Industry  Lobby
Only  the  title  of  the  "Truth  in  Packaging"  bill  as   passed
resembles  the  original  measure  introduced   by  Sen.  Philip  A.
Hart  (D.  Midi).    Hart's  bill  was designed  to  prohibit  decep-
tive  labelling   and   sales  promotions   ("cents   off"—cents  off
what?  and   "six   jumbo  ounces"—what's   a  jumbo  ounce?).
The  heart  of  the  bill,  Section  3d,  on  weights  and  quantities,
was  aimed  to  reduce  the  number  of  types  of  packages  in  which
a  company  could  market  a  product  and  thus  to  counter  the
deliberate  confusion-  which  reigns  on  supermarket   shelves.
A  Friend  in  Morton  of  Morton  Foods
These  provisions,  though  modified,  were  still   recognizable
when  the  bill  passed  the  Senate  in  June.    The  lobby  against
it—perhaps  the  most  powerful  in  the  89th   Congress—found
few  friends  in  the  Senate  Commerce  Committee.    One  of  the
few   was  Senator  Thurston   Morton   (R.   Ky)   whose   family
founded  Morton  Foods.    In  the  House  the  lobby  had  better
luck.  The  labelling  section  was  amended.  Instead  of  prohibit-
ing  misleading  labels,  it  merely  provided  that  ingredients  and
package  sizes  must  be  clearly displayed;  if  the  consumer  didn't
realize  what   she  was  reading   that  would  be  her  hard   luck.
The  heart  of  the  bill  on  weights  and  quantities  was  eliminated
altogether.     In  its  place  was  a  provision  suggesting   that  in-
dustry  voluntarily  reduce  and  standardize  sizes  and  quantities.
In  two  years,  if  industry's  record  of  self-reform  isn't  satisfac-
tory,  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  can  come  back  to  Congress
and  ask  for   regulation.    A  first  report  by  the  House   Com-
merce  Committee,  quickly withdrawn, revealed  that  these  revi-
sions  were  made  with  the  help  of  the  "affected  industries."  In
order  to  get  the  bill  to  the  House  floor  at  all,  its  supporters
had  to  pledge  ("our  souls,"  as  one  of  them  put  it)   that  they
would  not  try  to  restore  Section  5d  on  the  floor.
The  lobby  had  the  bill  beaten  before  it  reached  the  House.
The   President  vaguely  supported   consumer   legislation.     He
never  came  out  publicly  for  the  Hart  bill.    He  gave  responsi-
bility   for   the   government's   case  to   Secretary  of   Commerce
John  T.  Connor,  a  former  drug  manufacturer, and  no  enthu-
siast  for  consumer  legislation.    "All  Johnson  wanted,"  said  a
member  of  the  House  Commerce  Committee,  "was  a  bill  he
could  call  a  Truth  in  Packaging'  Act.    He  didn't  care  what
was  in  it."
They  Got  The  Message
Sen.  Hart  asked  35  magazines  to  run  stories  on  his
"Truth  in  Packaging"  bill.    All   refused.    After  Look
Magazine  ran  an  attack  by  the  head  of  General  Foods
called   "Let's  Keep  Politics  Out  of   the   Pantry,"  Hart
asked   its   publisher   Gardner   Cowles  for   "equal  time"
to  give  the  consumer  point  of  view.    Cowles  refused.
He   wrote  Hart   that   "the   public"  does   not   feel   any
strong   need   for   reform  in  packaging  and  labelling."
Saturday  Evening  Post   and  Reader's  Digest  commis-
sioned  articles  but  never  published  them.    The  Senate
Commerce   Committee  hearings   disclosed   that   behind
this  blackout  was  a  talk  with  executives  of  these  and
other  leading  magazines  by  Paul  Willis,  then  President
of  the  Grocery  Manufacturers'  Association.  Willis  told
them  the  time  had  come  for  them  to  understand  their
"interdependency"   with   their   advertiser  "bread-and-
butter."    They   understood.
The  NAM  briefed  Congressmen  on  the  bill.    The  Grocery
Manufacturers   Association  organized   a  special  committee  to
fight  it.     Participating  companies   included  Kellogg's,   Gen-
eral  Foods,  Proctor  &  Gamble,  Nabisco  and  Pet  Milk.     Bot-
tlers,  box  makers;  the  candy,  cosmetic  and   drug   industries;
the  canners  and  even  Better  Business  Bureaus  were   represent-
ed,  though  the  last  are  supposed  to  prevent  frauds  not  facili-
tate  them.
Among  the  special  pleaders  were  Neil  McElroy,  of P & G,
once   Ike's  Secretary  of   Defense,   and  Wm.  Geoghegan,  an
assistant  deputy  Attorney  General   under  Kennedy   and  John-
son.    Campbell   Soup  President  Wm.  Murphy,  who  had  been
on   Secretary  Connor's  board   at   Merck,   saw  his   old  friend
about  the  bill.    The   lobby  needed   a  few  liberals  and  man-
aged  to  corral  the  following  Democrats:  Gilligan  of  Cincin-
nati  (home  of  P&G),  Mackay  of  Atlanta  (Coca  Cola),  Mur-
phy  -of   Staten  Island   (Campell  Soup)   and  Friedel  of  Balti-
more.    Six  Congressmen   were  taken  on  a  tour  of   Baltimore
plants  where  machines bore  special  placards  saying  their  oper-
ators  would  be  out  of  work  if  Section  5d  passed.    One  over-
wrought  candy  manufacturer  even  pleaded  that  the  bill  would
take  the  romance  out  of  St.  Valentine   packages   and   outlaw
the  hole  in  Life  Savers.
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Street   ..................................
City  .......................................
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name  ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
....  Zip..........State........
a  gift  sub  to:
City  ............................................  Zip..........State........
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
10/10/66
Fifties
Also  PLEASE  Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers  Urgent
IE  Stones  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
AS**-
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  P.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and  th«
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W..    Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   SB  in   the   U.S.;     $6   in   Canada:    $10   elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rate*:
515  to-  Europe;   $20  to  Israel.   Asia-  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED