I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jan31.pdf

============================================================

What  The First Bomb on North  Vietnam  Will  Destroy,  P.  2
The  Advice  the  President Seems  On  The  Verge  of  Disregarding
"We  have   been  patient   for   five  years   with   those   who
offered  a  military  solution  in  Vietnam.  .  .  .  Now  let  us  be
equally  patient  in  the  effort  to  find  a  peaceful  solution."
—McGovern  (D., S. Dak)  in  a Senate  speech Jan. 20
"We  cannot  expect  that  a  conflict  which  has  raged  so bit-
terly  for  so  long  will  be  quickly  or  easily  resolved.  .  .  .
We  are  concerned  that  unless  we  can  halt  or  reverse  the
escalation  of   the  last   months  it  will  become, increasingly
difficult  to  achieve  a  further  pause,  a  cease-fire  and  mean-
ingful  negotiations."
—Letter  to  the  President  by  76  Democratic  Congressmen
"I  do  not  believe  that  we  will  make  any  critical  point,
solve  any  dilemma  or  move  along  the  way  to  an honorable
settlement  now  by  resumed  or  by  larger  bombings."
—Senator  John Sherman  Cooper  (R., Ky),  Jan. 26
'•If  there  is  a  likelihood  of  a  slowdown  of  the   fighting
...  I  would  not resume  bombing."
—Senator  George  D. Aiken  (R.,  Vt)  Jan. 26
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL  XIV,  NO.  4JANUARY  31,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16   CENTS
Guns  and  Butter  Billions  for  One,  Millions  for  the  Other
Our  private  economy  is  run  for  private  profit.    Our  pub-
lic  economy  is  run  for  war.    All  other  activities  in  either  are
peripheral.    This  is  the  real  design  of  our  Society,  whether
Great  or  just  Swollen,  as  its  outline  may  be  perceived  in  the
annual  budget.    In  the  private  economy,  the  rule  is  free  rein
for   the   exploitation   of   human   and   material   resources;   the
protective   restrictions  are  minimal  and  relatively  recent;  the
funds  required  to  repair  the  resultant  wastage  of  human  and
natural  resources  are  meagre  and  newly  won.    But  war. is  in-
dustry's  No.   1  Customer;  the  military  represent   by  far  our
biggest  and  oldest  bureaucracy.   Overnight  the  President  can
add  $15  billions  in  supplemental  appropriations   for  a  miser-
able,  distant  and  unpopular  war,  and  it  will  be  a  miracle  if
anyone  in  Congress   dares  vote  against  "giving  our   boys  all
they  need,"  though  this  tender  concern   does   not  extend  to.
asking  why  send  them  there  in  the  first  place.    But  there  are
plenty   to  grumble   because   the   budget   adds   another   $250
millions  to  that  feeble  little  skirmish  known   as  the  war  on
poverty.    (Even  our  metaphors  have  to  be  martial.)
More  Tender  With  Missiles  Than Men
In  the  budgeting  for  human  welfare,  the  butter  is  every-
where  spread  thin.    In  the  huge  confines  of  the  $60  billion
allotted  to  the  military  for  the  next  fiscal  year,  the  portions
are  generous,   even  in  areas  thought   of  as  civilian.    In   the
allocation  of  Federal  funds  to  "education,  training  and  related
functions,"   for  example,   25%   goes  to  the  Defense   Depart-
ment,  and  this  figure  does  not  include   "specialized   military
training  such  as  recruit  and  pilot  training."    In  the  next fiscal
year  the  Pentagon  will  spend  more  than  twice  as  much  in  this
category  as  the  poverty  program.    The  latter,  for  all  its train-
ing  projects  including  Head  Start,  Job  Corps  and  Vista,  will
get  $1,010  millions.    The  Pentagon   share  of  the   education
pie  will be  $2,209  million.    Another  way to  measure  the  pov-
erty  program  is  to  dive  into  the  huge  confines  of  the  budget
and  find  that  the  war  on  poverty  will  get  a  half  billion   less
next  fiscal  year  than  the  total  we  will  spend  on  research  and
development  of  missiles  ($2,314  million).   We  are  spending
more  on  developing   "a  new  generation"   (as  the  Pentagon's
tenderly  philoprogenitive   language  puts  it)   of  missiles—such
2                                                                        ,
Far  Cheaper To  Pension  Them Off
To  get  an  idea  of  the  spiraling  cost  to  the  U.S.  of
fighting  the  war  in  Vietnam—American  ground  forces
and  the  helicopters  that  support  them,  alone,  are  firing
100  million  dollars'  worth  of  ammunition each  month.
That  means,  in  this  single  category  of  battle  expense,
it  takes  up to  $35,000  to  kill  each  Communist now  being
reported  as  a  fatality.    Over  and  above  this  cost,  110
million   dollars   worth   of   ammunition,   missiles   and
bombs   is   "expended"  each   month  by   the   Air   Force
Navy  air  arm.   These   figures   were  revealed  January
20  by  Secretary  McNamara  .  .  .  seeking  an  additional
$12.7    billion  to  help  pay  for  the  war.
—U.S. News  & World Report,  Jan. 31
as  Minuteman  HI—than  we  are  on  developing  a  better  gen-
eration  in  our  slums.    Total  military  research   and   develop-
ment   ($6,893  millions)   is  almost  four  times  as  big  as  the
whole  poverty  program  ($1,750  millions).
Another  measure of  the  favored  place  occupied  by  the  mili-
tary  bureaucracy is  in  the  field  of  housing.    In  the  three  fiscal
years  of  '65,  '66  and  '67,  military  family  housing   allowances
will  add  up  to  almost  exactly  as  much  as  urban  renewal  and
public  housing  combined.    Here  are  the  figures  in  millions
of   dollars:
M.  P.  H.
Urban   Renewal
Public   Housing
'65
619
324
230
'66
650
362
249
'67
545
413
261
Total
1,814
1,099
740
We  do  not  begrudge  the  military  their  housing   allowances.
We  only  cite  the  figures  as  a  measure  of  how  little  we  are
doing  in  the  crucial  field  of  urban  renewal  and  public  hous-
ing.    This  ranks  with  education  as  the  two  most   important
sectors  of  the  fight  to  save  a  whole generation  of  youth  from
moral  decay  in  our  urban  jungles.    It  is  also  a  fight  to  save
our  cities  from  race  war.    Only  a  few  weeks  ago  a  little  no-
ticed   report   warned   that   conditions  in  the  national   capital
are  worse  in  this  respect   than  they  were  in  Los  Angeles   on
the  eve  of  the  Watts  rioting.     Such  are  the  risks  we  run  at
home  while  we  escalate  abroad.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  91,1966
Resumption  of  Aerial  Attack  Prepared  While  Signs  of  De-Escalation  Ignored
Johnson's  Credibility  Will  Be The  First  Victim  of  The  First  Bomb
If  the  bombing  of  the  North  resumes,   it  will  be  an  act  of
criminal  folly.   The  resumption,  it  is  clear,  does  not  have  ma-
jority  support  in  the  Congress  or  the  country.    An  AP  survey
of  the  Senate  (Washington  Star,  Jan.  26)   turned  up  only  25
Senators  willing  to  say  they  favored  resumption  of   bombing
(an  equal  number  opposed  it)   and  only  18 who  were  for  ex-
tending  it  to  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.     Among  those  who  de-
clined  to  take  a  position  was  the  Republican  leader,   Dirksen.
Senators   rarely  heard   from  on  foreign  policy  were   speaking
up—Jennings  Randolph   (D.,   W.Va.)    for  example;   he  op-
posed  resumption  and  said that  in  a  war which had  been  going
on   for   more  than   20  years  it  was  hardly  surprising  that  a
peace  offensive  on  our  part  "no  matter  how  sincere  or  inten-
sive  would  fail  to  yield  definitive, results  in  so  short  a  period
of  time."    Twenty-four hours  before  Washington  began  to  in-
timate  that  resumption  was  imminent,  Le  Monde   (dated   Jan.
25  but  it  appeared   on  Jan.  24)   for  the  first  time  expressed
faith  in  Johnson's   sincerity  and  urged  the  other  side  to  take
him  at  his  word  and  negotiate.    All  this  fragile  and  newly
won  credibility  will  be  the  first  victim  of  the  first  bomb.
Preposterous   "Evidence"
The  "evidence"   given  out  to  the  press  at  a  not-for-attribu-
tion  briefing  the  Afternoon  of  Jan.  25  to  support   resumption
is  preposterous.     More   than   200  trucks,  for   example,   were
photographed   in  the  southern  area  of  North  Vietnam  between
Dec.  31  and  Jan.  13,  "most  of  them"  on  their  way  to  what  is
said  to  be  the  gateway  to  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  trial.    That  is  an
average  of   15  trucks  a  day.   That   is  surprisingly  little  traffic
even  for  an  underdeveloped  country.   The  North Vietnamese
are  also  said—grave crime—to  be  using the  cessation of  bomb-
ing  to  repair  their   roads  and   bridges.     Could  we   seriously
expect  to  see  them  left  in  J/'jrepair?    We  suspect  all  this  non-
sense  cloaks  the  real  reasons.    One  of  them,  as  the  Washing-
ton  Star  explained  Jan.  26,  is  that  the  U.S.   "would   appear
weak  in  the  eyes  of  'he  world"  if  the  bombing  were  not  re-
sumed.     Another—and   we  believe  the  controlling   reason—
No  End  of  Fun  in  LBJ's  White  House
Henry   Wadsworth  Longfellow,   Tony   Curtis  and  Ali
Khan  turned  out  to  be  the  most  persistent  callers  dur-
ing   the   month-long   check   of   incoming   calls   at   the
White   House.     The   check,   for   what   Press   Secretary
Moyers  said  was  primarily  to  determine   which   offices
needed  all  their  phones,  was  called  off  Monday morning.
A  corps  of  switchboard  operators   from  the  Army  was
used  to  help  out  the  regular   White  House    operators.
The   extra   operators    presumably   were   necessary   be-
cause  of  the  delays  caused  by  the  requirement  that  cal-
lers  identify  themselves.    And  since  many  of  the  Army
operators   were   unfamiliar  with  the   names   of   callers
who  would  be  known  to  the  regulars,  they   asked   the
callers   to  spell   their  names.    Because  so  many  of  the
callers  became  exasperated  with the  operators  they  used
a   rash   of  aliases.    Marvin  Watson,  the  White   House
appointments  secretary  instigated   the  check.
—Washington  Star:  In Capital  Corridors,  Jan. 23
Ciime  to  the   surface  when   the  Star's  summary  of   this  same
briefing  went  on  to  say,  "Moreover,  the  Saigon  government  is
known  to  favor  the  attacks,  and  U.S.  officials  believe  it  is  im-
portant   to  have  a  high   degree   morale  in   South   Vietnam."
This  was one  of  the  excuses  given  last  February.    The  morale,
of  course,  is  not  that  of  the  common  people,  sick  of  the  war
from   both   sides,  but   the  profiteers,  absentee   landlords   and
playboy  Generals  who. are  our  only  political  base  in  the  coun-
try  we  mercilessly devastate.
The  Administration and  the  press  play  down  the  fact  there
has  been  no  offensive  action  by  troops  on  the  other  side  since
the  New  Year  truce  ended,  only  scattered  terrorist  actions  and
the  mortar  attack  on  Da  Nang.    Our  own  intelligence   reports
no  contact with  North  Vietnamese  regulars  since  last  Novem-
ber  while our  bombers  have  been  burning  up  the  countryside
with  fury  and  our  troops  have  h?en  aggressively   seeking  out
a  foe  hard  to   find.   These  are  the  possible  signals  of  the  de-
escalation  the  President   said  he  wanted,   but  he   ignores   in-
stead  of  exploring  them..
Morse  Explains  Why  He  Has  No  Faith  in  Johnson's  Peace   Offensive
"The  State  of  the  Union  message   repeated  many  of  the
misrepresentations  and  inconsistencies   that  have  led  us  to
the  brink  of  massive  war  in  Asia.    The  State  Department,
the  Defense  Department  and  the  White  House  have   sought
to  reduce  all  our  difficulties  there  to  the  neat  pattern  of  the
30s,  to  equate  all  of  Asia  with  the  analogy  of  Munich, and
have  used  a  'devil'  theory  to  arouse   passions   against   both
North  Vietnam and  China.
"It  is   Weariness  with  the  platitudinous  preaching  of   an
administration  that  seems  not  to  understand  the  complex-
ities  of  world  affairs  that   is  responsible   for  the  dread  and
lack   of   enthusiasm  for  war   in  Asia.    Said  the   President,
'because  a  just  nation cannot  leave  to  the  cruelty  of  its  ene-
mies  a  people  who  have  staked  their  lives  and  independence
on   America's   solemn   pledge.'    The   only   people   in   South
Vietnam  who  have  staked  their  lives  on  American support
have  been  the  cliques  and coteries  of  business  men  and mili-
tary  men  who  have  lived  for  11  years  off  American  money
and  support.    That  is  why  we  hear  Ky  reject   negotiations
with  the  north;  that  is  why  this  little  tinhorn  dictator  of
South   Vietnam—whom   we   financed   and   set   up—is   most
eager   that   American  bombing  of  the  North   be  resumed.
"The  most  flagrant  inconsistency  in  the  President's   mes-
sage  is  the  one  that  has  marked  our  Vietnam  policy  for  12
years.    He  declared,  'We  stand  by  the  Geneva  agreements
of  1954  and  1962.'   A  few  sentences  later  he  said:  'We  will
act  as  we  must  to  help  protect  the  independence  of  the  vali-
ant  people  of  South  Vietnam.'   To  the  extent  that  they  are
independent,  it  is  only  the  extent   to  which  we  have   made
them  so  in  violation  of  the  Geneva  agreement.     We  cannot
have  it  both  ways.
"These  are  the  reasons  why  I  am  not  impressed  with  the
chances   that   the  current   peace   offensive  will  culminate  in
anything  but  another   escalation   of  the  war.    We  are  too
committed  to  our  own  version   of  history,  our  official   pro-
nouncements  of  American  purity,  and  to  our  oversimplifica-
tion  to  allow  us  the  flexibility  needed  to  reach  a  peace   set-
tlement.    Can  the  same  men  whose  miscalculations   brought
us  to  the  brink  of  war  lead  us  away  from  it  under  the  same
colors   and  the  same   reasoning    that   proved   so   fallacious
from  the  beginning?"
—Abridged  from  a Morse  speech  in  the Senate  Jan.  19
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   31,1966
Alaskan  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  Reassuring  But  Illusory  Talk  Last  August  With  LBJ
Gruening  in  Dramatic  Move  Would  Bar  Use  of  Draftees  in  Southeast  Asia
A  focus  for  militant  peace  action  was  provided  when  Sen-
ator  Gruening,   Jan.  25,  with  the  support   of   Senator   Morse
introduced  amendments  to  three  pending  Vietnamese  military
and  AID   bills.    These   riders  provide  that   no  draftees  may
be  sent   to   Southeast   Asia  without   Congressional    approval.
Though  slighted  by  most  of  the  press  including the  New   York
Time!,  the  amendments  would  force  members  of  Congress  to
stand  up  and  be  counted  on  expansion  of  the  war.    In  intro-
ducing  these  measures  Senator  Gruening  disclosed  in  a  speech
for  Senate  delivery  that  last  August  20  he  had  been  about  to
offer   a  similar  rider  to  the  Defense   Appropriation   bill   then
pending in the  Senate when he was called  to  the White  House.
The  President  urged  him  not  to  introduce  the  rider  and  "said
that  in  any  event  no  draftees  would  be  sent  to  Vietnam  be-
fore  January"  unless  a  "grave  national  emergency  develops."
Serious   Effort   or   Soft-Soap?
In   releasing  a  letter  he   sent   the   President  at  that   time,
agreeing   not  to  introduce  the  rider,  Senator  Gruening   lifted
the  curtain  on  talks  which  encouraged   pro-peace   Senators   to
believe  that  Mr.  Johnson   was  seriously  seeking   peace.     The
Alaskan  said  he  was  especially gratified  by Mr.  Johnson's   press
conference  statement  of  July  28  "that  there  would  be  no  par-
ticular  problem   in  bringing  the  Vietcong   and  the   National
Liberation  Front  to  the  conference  table."    The  Senator  said
he  was  also  pleased   by  tfte  President's  readiness  for   reunifica-
tion   by  elections   in  accordance  with  the  Geneva    agreement.
"Of  course,  as  I  said,"  the  letter  continued,   referring  to  their
conversation   at  the  White  House,  "it   is  difficult   to  convince
those with  whom  we  are  seeking  to  arrange  a  cessation  of  hos-
tilities  of  our  bona  fides  while  we  continue  the  bombing  of
North  Vietnam."
In  introducing  the  riders,  Senator  Gruening  injected  a  new
Non-Toxic  But  Deadly?
One  Australian  soldier   has  died  and  several   others
have   been   made   ill   from   the   effects   of   "non-toxic"
gases  in  Vietnam.    According  to  the  Sydney  Morning-
Herald  (Jan.  13),  the  Australians were  searching  a  tun-
nel  northwest  of   Saigon  when  they  spotted   two  Viet
Cong.   The  troops  hurled  grenades  and  then  smoke  and
gas  into  the  corridor.   After  two  hours,  assuming  that
the   gas   and  smoke  had  dispersed,   two  engineers   re-
turned.    The  Viet   Cong  were   gone,   but  the   gas  and
smoke  remained.    "Smoke  and  gas  stick  to  the  side  of
the  tunnels,"  explained  one  engineer   later.     Although
wearing  a  gas  mask,  one  of  the  Australians  was  over-
come  and fell  unconscious.   His  companion ran  for  help.
The  rescue  team,  after  dragging  the  man  out,  also  was
overcome,  and  had  to  be  hospitalized.    The   Pentagon's
report  of  the  incident  is  vague.    The  death  of  the  en-
gineer  is  attributed  to  "lack  of  oxygen  and  smoke  in-
halation."   Any  suggestion  that  gas  may  have  been  a
factor   is   flatly   rejected  with  a   stern   reminder  that
"non-toxic"  gas  is  harmless.—P.O.
question   into   debate   over   the   Vietnamese   war.     He   asked
why   draftees  should  be  sent  to  Southeast   Asia  when   "over
300,000  well-trained, experienced  troops  are  stationed   in  Eu-
rope."    He  also  put  into  the  Record  a  Defense    Department
table  which  showed   that  more  than   $5.5   billions  had   been
spent  in fiscal '63,  '64  and  '65  on  Army Reserve  and  National
Guard   forces.     The   Senator   asked   why   draftees   should   be
sent  when  "hundreds  of  thousands"  of  these  trained  reservists
"are  going  about  their  daily  civilian  jobs,  sacrificing  only  one
evening   a  week  or  one  day  a  month   for  which   they  receive
pay."     This   involves   basic   military  and   political   questions
which   should   be   fully   aired,  particularly  in   respect   to   the
large  U.S.  army  in  West  Germany.
Two  Dispatches  from  The  Mekong  Delta  Portray  the  Feudalism  We  Support
In  Long  An,  one  of  Vietnam's  most  fertile  provinces  more
than   85   percent   of   the   peasant   population   are   tenants.
This  land-ownership  pattern  may  help  explain  why,  despite
a  tremendous  cost  in  lives  and  material,  the  war  in  Long
An  is  no  closer  to  being  won  than  it  was  several  years  ago.
.  .  .  [Yet]  the  rice-rich heartland  of  the  Saigon  region  and
the  upper  Mekong  Delta,  linked  together   by  Long  An,  re-
mains  the  prize  for  which  the  war  is  being  fought.     Here,
in  less  than  14  provinces,  live  almost  two-thirds  of  the  15
million  South  Vietnamese.  .  .  .  American  military  and civil-
ian  advisers   agree  there  are   many   more  Viet   Cong  than
a  year   ago.
Most   important  in   Long  An,   however,  government   and
the  mass  of  peasantry  still  seem  to  be  on the  opposing  sides.
.  .  .  Land  is  of  such  paramount  importance  here  that  the
Viet  Cong  allow  only  the  landless  or  very  poor  farmers  to
command  guerrilla  units  or  qualify  as  party  members.  The
provincial   government's   social  order  is   the  exact   reverse.
Most  of  the  military  officers,  civil  servants  and community
leaders  come  from  the  land-owning  gentry.    The  same  is
true  in  Saigon  where only  one  of  the  10  generals  now  shar-
ing  power  has  any  rapport with  the  masses.    He  is  Central
Vietnam's  erratic  Maj. Gen. Nguyen  Chanh Thi,  who  also  is
the  only  one of  peasant  origin.  .  .  .
In  the  delta,  out  of   1.2  million  farms,  only  260,000  are
owner-operated.  .  .  .  Some  3,000  rich  Saigon   families   still
are  the  big  landowners.
—Richard  Critchfield   in  the  Washington  Star, Jan.  2U
The   village   chief,   a   36-year   old   former   Army   officer
named  Do  Hun  Minh  .  .  .  explained  through  an  interpreter
that  only  four  village  youngsters  since  the  year  1950  have
been  in  high  school.    No  youngster  in  the  village  has  ever
attended   college.    "The  Vietnamese   government   continues
to  support  an  exclusive  educational  system   in  a  revolution-
ary  war,"  says   [Richard]   Burnham   [the   U.S.   aid  mission
province  representative].    "All  this  is  the  preservation  of
privilege.    It  is   madness  and  until  it  is  changed   into  an
American  type  egalitarian  educational  system,   most  of  our
efforts  will  be  marginal."   Those  other  efforts  .  .  .  are  con-
siderable.    USOM  pumps about  half  a  million  dollars  a  year
into  Kienhoa  [province],   arranging  for  medical  teams  and
technical   assistance,   and  building   dams,   school   rooms,   a
potable  water system,  an orphanage,  three  Ash  markets,  two
electricity  systems.    But  knowledgable  Americans   here  say
that  the  Vietcong  still  offer  the  only  outlet  for  a  bright  boy
from  the  villages.    The  static   nature  of   Sondong   assures
that  there  is  no  legitimate  route  out  of  the  rice  paddy.  The
rural  children  cannot  be  officers,  administrators   or  district
chiefs."
—Ward  Just,  in  Washington  Post, Jan.  23
1   '/
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, January  31,1966
Time  to  Recall  How Past  Peace  Feelers  Were  Hidden  In  Disingenuous Palaver
Secretary  Rusk  Provides  A  Brilliant  Lesson  in  How  Not  to  Be  Candid
We  thought  readers would like  to  see for  themselves just
how  hard  it  is  to  get  a  straight  answer  from   Secretary
Rusk  on peace  responses from  the  other  side.   This  is  from
the   official    press  conference   transcript   of  January   21:
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  you  spoke  of  receiving  no indication  from
Hanoi  of  being  interested  in  peace.    Can  we  assume  that,
therefore,  any  reports  we  may  have  received  from  the Rus-
sians  were  negative after  the  visit  of the  Soviet  delegation  to
Hanoi,  or  that  we  have  received  no  reports  from  the Rus-
sians ?
A.  I  would  not  wish  to  embroider  on what  I  said  in  terms
of  channels  or  communications.   I  am  simply  saying  that  we
have  not  received  the  kind  of  response   for   which  we  were
hoping  during  this  period.
[Comment:  The  questioner's  paraphrase  was  inaccurate:
Rusk  did  not  say  we  had  received  "no  indication from  Hanoi
of  being  interested  in  peace."   What  Rusk  said  in  his  open-
ing  statement   was  that  there  had  been  "an  overwhelming
favorable  response" to  the  peace  offensive  "except  from  those
who  could  in  fact  sit  down  and  make  peace."   All  he  says  in
reply  is that  the  U.S.  had  not  received  "the  kind  of  response
for  which we  were  hoping."   No  one  asked  him  what  kind of
response  that  was  but  an  attempt   was  made  to  get  clari-
fication:]
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,   was  there  specifically  no  reply  by  the
Hanoi  government  on  the  memorandum which  was  delivered
to  them  by  an  American  diplomat  three  weeks  ago  or  so ?
A.  I  think  my  opening  statement   covers  that  point.
[Comment: Nowhere  in Rusk's opening statement was there
any  reference  to  this  memorandum.    If  there  was  no  reply,
why  not  say  so?]
Q.  Aside  from  what  we  can  all  read,  were  you  telling  us
that  you have had  no  response  from  Hanoi or  no  satisfactory
response ?
A.  Well,  I  think  that  I  would  again  go  back  to  my  state-
ment:  "I  regret  that  I  cannot  report  to  you  any  positive and
encouraging  response  to  the  hopes  of  the  overwhelming ma-
jority  of  mankind."
[Comment: This  seems  to  imply  that  there  was  a  response
but   not  one  we  considered  "positive   and  encouraging."    A
questioner  tried  another  tack:]
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  despite that  fact,  Hanoi  and  Peking  have
been  discussing  out  loud  your  14 points  in  some  detail,  and
quarreling with them, of course.   Has  the  United  States made
an  effort  either—through  any  channel—-to  clarify  some of  the
questions  that  have  been  raised  on  the  other  side,  as  to  the
Now  You See  It,  Now  You Don't
Mr.  Spivack:  Well,  Mr.  Secretary,  can  you  tell  us
whether  the  report  that  the  Washington  Post  published
on  Saturday  that  there  had  been  a  response  from  North
Vietnam  but  that  we  considered  the  response   negative
but  ambiguous?
Secretary  Rusk: No, no,  I  have  not  had—and  I  think
I  would  know  about  it  if  there  were such  a  response—I
have   not   seen   a   response   direct   or   indirect   to   the
United  States  by  Hanoi  in  this  situation.
—On Meet  the Press, Jan, S3
"By  specifying a  reply  'to  the  United  States,'  it  was
learned,  Rusk  was  distinguishing  between  responses  by
Hanoi  to  other  nations  who  passed  comments  back  to
the  United States  and  the  absence  of a  reply  specifically
addressed   to  the  United  States."
—Murray  Marder  in  the  Washington  Post, Jan. 24
Later  that  same  day, on  leaving  a  closed  session  of
the   Senate  Foreign   Relations   Committee,   Rusk   said
there  had  been  "no  constructive  or  responsive   move"
from  the  other  side.   (Washington  Eve.  Star, Jan.  H)
exact  meaning  of  these  points?
[Comment:  Instead  of  answering,  the  Secretary   made  an
angry  little  speech:]
A.  If   they  want  clarification,   they  know  how  to  get   it.
Why  are  they  afraid  to  come  to  the  table?    Why  are  they
afraid  to engage in discussions.   Why?  . . .
[Comment: One possible  reason  is  that  they  fear  we intend
to  cheat  again,  as  we did after  1954.   When  Rusk  finished  his
tirade,  he  was  asked:]
Q.  Well,  is  the  answer  to  the  question  "No?"
A.  I  beg  pardon.
Q.  Is  the  answer   to  the  question  "No?"    That  we  have
made  no  effort?
A.  No, the  answer  to  the  question  is  the  one I  gave.
[Laughter}.
[Comment: The  answer  clearly  was  "No."   It  implied  that
clarification  could  be  obtained  only  at  the  conference  table.
But  since  coming to the  conference  table  may  seriously  strain
Hanoi's  relations  with  Peking,  and  leave  it  at  the  mercy of
our  good  faith,  can  it  afford  to  do  so  without  some  guaranty
that  this  time we really  mean  to  abide  by  the  Geneva  agree-
ments?]
We'll  Be Clad  to Send A  Sample  Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
1/81/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's   The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Clara  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published   every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week   in   December  and   Ui«
fint   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation-Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:   *S  in   the  U.S.:  $6  In   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall   rate»:
$15  to  Europe:   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED