I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966sep05.pdf

============================================================

British Military  Expert  Contradicts LBJ  on Air  Losses,  P.  4
A  Voice  All  Claim  to  Respect  But  None Seem to  Heed
"The    international    climate   has   not   been   so   explosive      terrible  holocaust  .  .  .  All  the  wonderful  creations  of  man-
since  the  end  of  World  War  II  ...      If  fear  and  suspicion      kind,  all  achievements  in  mankind's  history  of   about  one
prevail ...  I  am  afraid  we  are  going  to  face  a  great  and     million  years,  are  in  danger  of  being   obliterated."
—UN  Secretary  General  V  Thant  at  a  luncheon  in  his  honor  in  Mexico  City,  Aug.  24.
1. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  26
September   5,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Between  Johnson's  Yin  and  Mao's  Yang
A  month  abroad,  away  from  the  stale  atmosphere  of  Wash-
ington,  provides  fresh  perspective.    The  eye  reapproaches  the
familiar  globe,  as  if  from  a  space  vehicle.    One   unexpected
feature  is  the  resemblance  between  the  two  giants,  the  United
States  and  China, though  one  is  so rich  and  the  other  so  poor.
Both  have  been   isolating  themselves   from  their  own  closest
allies   by  what   Senator   Fulbright   called   "the   arrogance  of
power."    The  gulf  opened  between  Western   Europe  and  the
United   States  by  the  Vietnamese  war  is  as  wide  as  the  gulf
opened  between  Eastern Europe  and  China by the  latter's  neo-
Stalinism.    Only  the  obsequious  West  Germans  support  us  in
the  Vietnamese  war;  they  are,  in  this  sense,  our  Albanians.
But  even  in  West  Germany,  there  are  fearful   misgivings  be-
neath  the  surface;  these  were  voiced  by Adenauer,  in  the inter-
view  he  gave  Cyrus  Sulzberger  (New   York  Times  internation-
al  edition,  Aug.  8),   advising the  U.S.  to  get  out  of  Vietnam
lest—with  America  bogged  down  in  Asia—Russia   dominate
Europe.     In   this  Der  Alte   said   publicly  what   other   West
European  statesmen  only  say privately.
Fear  of  War  With  China
American  and  Chinese  intransigeance  have  created  strange
attitudes  on   both   sides  of   the   East-West   line.     A  wealthy
American  investor  with  whom  I  talked  in  a  chance  encounter
abroad  said  he  was  surprised  by  the  violent  hostility  to  the
Vietnamese  war  he  encountered  among  conservative friends  in
London   financial   circles;  they  thought   the  U.S.   was  in   the
wrong  and  ought  to  get  out  of  Vietnam.    On  the  other  hand,
a  close  friend  who  feels  as  I  do  about  the  Vietnamese  war,
was  appalled   in  Yugoslavia  to  find  intellectuals  so  fearful  of
China's  dogmatism  that  they  hoped  for  an  American military
victory  in  Vietnam  as a  means  of  humbling  the  Chinese.     The
main  fear  on  our  side  of  the  line  is  that  the  U.S.  may  drag
Western  Europe  with  it  into  a  war  with  China;  de  Gaulle
reflected  that  fear  when  he  let  it  be  known  in  August  that  he
would  not  allow  the  air  bases  the  U.S.  is  evacuating  in  France
to  be  maintained  on  a  stand-by  basis  for  emergencies.     The
French  reiterated  de  Gaulle's  position  that  France  would  come
to  the  aid  of  any NATO  power  which  was  the  victim  of  "un-
provoked   aggression"   but   would   insist  on   being   "the   sole
judge"   of   what   constituted   unprovoked   aggression.     (UPI
from  Paris  in  NYT   inter'l  Aug.  10.)     This  serves  notice  on
the   U.S.   not   to   expect   automatic  French   support   through
NATO  if  we  provoke  war  with  China.
The  main  fear  on  the  other  side  of  the  East-West  Line  is
Operation-Was-Successful
But-Patient-Died  Dept.
(Military  Division)
Saigon,  Aug  26—Nearly  two-thirds  of  the   Americans
killed  in  a  fierce  battle  north  of   here   were  victims  of
American   napalm   that  missed  its   marked  targets  by
only  50  meters  a  general  explained   sadly  tonight.   The
same  napalm   wounded   nearly  one-fifth   of  the   Ameri-
cans  injured  in  action,  said  Maj.  Gen.  Wm.  E.  De  Puy,
commander   of   the   1st   Infantry    Division   .   .   .  The
General   said  that   while   "commanders    made   no   mis-
takes"  in  the  action,  one  of  the   American   battalions
lost   its   acting   commander,   and   two   company    com-
manders  were  lost along  with  a  number  of  other  officers.
These  losses,  he said,  contributed  to  "a lack  of  cohesion"
during  part  of  the  action.
—Ralph  H. Kennan in  Baltimore  Sun,  Aug. 27
Saigon,  Aug.   27—U.S.  Air  Force,  Navy  and   Marine
planes  flew  a  record  number  of  missions  Friday  against
North  Vietnamese  targets,  it  was  announced  today  .  .  .
Despite  the  increasing  air  attacks,  a  high   U.S.   Navy
officer  said  that  sightings  of  south-bound   trucks   "have
increasing  appreciably   over   the   past  six   weeks."   He
insisted  that  "this  is  not indicative  that  the  interdiction
campaign   has  not  been  performing   well.    It  suggests
a  much  heavier   push  toward  the  South."
—Washington  Pout, Aug.  28
\  0
that  if  Mao  succeeds  in  consolidating himself  over  his  internal
opposition—and  this  is  seen  as  very  broad  and  wide,  indeed,
when  so  many  of  his  oldest  comrades  have  been  purged  and
vigilante  bands  have  to  be  called  up   to   intimidate  them—
then  this  would  encourage  the  hard-liners in  the  rest  of  the
Soviet  world.    In  Yugoslavia,'  in  Poland   and   in  Russia  the
struggle  to  widen  the  area  of  free  discussion,  against  bureau-
cratic  opposition  is  difficult   enough  as  it  is.    The   Mihailov
case  in  Yugoslavia   is  hardly  a  monument  to  Tito's liberalism.
There  are  analogous  fears  on  the  economic  side,  where  there
is  a  struggle  to  invigorate  bureaucratic  socialism  by  an   infu-
sion  of  managerial  free  enterprise  and  market  forces.There  are
indications  in  the  invective  of  the  Maoists  that  similar  prag-
matic  tendencies  had  made  their  appearance  in  China.     Mao-
ism  threatens  the  hopes  of  mingling  humanism  with  commu-
nism.    China  draws  support   among   the  Soviet  bloc  intellec-
tuals  only  from  the  repulsion   aroused   by  our  barbarous  war
in   Vietnam.     Were  it  not   for   Johnson's    reversion   to   big
stick  diplomacy  in  the  colonial  world,  Soviet  bloc  intellectuals
(Continued   on  Page    Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  5, 1966
Mahon  Says  $5  to  $15  Billion  More  Will  Be  Asked  For  Vietnam  After  November
Stennis  Hearings  Reflect   Conservative  Misgivings   About  LBJ's   War
(Continued   jront   Pcige    One)
would  be  looking  to  the   U.S.  for  example  and  inspiration  in
the  fight  for  freedom  of  expression.   In  the  perverse  dialectic
created   by  two  obsessed   and   wilful   old  men   in  Peking   and
Washington,  China's  main  argument  is  provided  by  our  fliers
over  Vietnam; America's,  by  Peking's  Red  Guards.  The  mod-
erates  on  both  sides  fear  polarization of  the  world  in  a  holy
war    between   Washington   and   Peking,   between    Johnson's
Yin   and  Mao's   Yang,   each  the  caricature  of  a  great   ideal.
Rusk's  Aesopian   Language
Both   countries  lay   claim   to  universal  hegemony.    China
seeks,  though  with  little  response  even  in  adjacent  areas,  the
leadership  of  the  world  revolutionary  movement;  the  U.S.,  to
protect   the  status  quo  everywhere.    "The   primary   purpose
of  our  military  forces,"  Secretary  Rusk  told  the  Veterans of
Foreign  Wars  Aug.  22,  "is  to  make  resort  to  force  by  the
adversaries   of   freedom   unprofitable  and   dangerous."     The
"adversaries  of  freedom"  is:Aesopian  language.    Just  as  the
Nazis  had  honorary  Aryans,  so  we  have  honorary   Jefferson-
ians,  like  Ky  in  Vietnam  and  Castelo  Branco  in  Brazil.    "We
are  not  trying to  establish   a  pax  Americana,"-Rusk  told  the
Stennis  committee  Aug.  25.   But  almost  in  the  same  breath
he  was  explaining  not  only  that  we had  special  military  pacts
with  40 countries but  warning  "No  would be aggressor  should
suppose  that  the  absence  of  a  defense  treaty,   Congressional
declaration  or  U.S.  military  presence  grants  immunity  to  ag-
gression."  This  intervcntionism  is  served  up  as  internation-
alism   while  those  who  believe  the   U.S.   should  act   through
international   organizations   and   not   by   unilateral    military
action  are  accused  of  being  isolationist!  The  Chinese  are  not
the   only  ones  who  believe  theirs  the   Middle  Kingdom,  em-
powered  by  Heaven   to  impose  law  and   order   on  the   outer
barbarians.
In   the  cracked  mirror  provided  by  Peking's  propaganda,
one   can   catch   glimpses   of   sober   dissident  views   warning
against  a  megalomania  that  has  been  vastly   overestimating
China's  power  and  influence.    The  Stennis  hearings  on  Amer-
ica's   world-wide   military  commitments,  which  opened  with
(tusk's   testimony,   reflects   not   too   dissimilar    conservative
misgivings  in  our  own  capital.     These  hearings  raise   ques-
tions  from  a  wholly  new quarter  about  our  militarized  foreign
policy  and  the   Vietnamese  war.     In  opening  the  hearings,
Senator   Stennis  warned,  as  Adenauer  did,  that  "we  cannot
let  the requirements  of  Southeast  Asia  .  .  .  degrade  the im-
portance  of  the  NATO area  which  is still  the  decisive  region."
He  said  we  had  to  face  up  to  "the  hard  fact  that  a  relatively
small  and  undeveloped  country  such  as  North  Vietnam   has
been  able  to  tie  us  down and  require  a  very  substantial  com-
Just   A  Jolly  Old  County  Fair
"The  second  program—and  in  the  long  run  the  more
important   of   the   two—is   our   pacification   program,
which  is  also  known  under  the  terms  of   'civic  action',
'revolutionary    development'   or   'rehabilitation.'     This
program  consists  of  pulling  out  of  the  village structure
the  Viet  Cong  who  have  been  living  in  those  areas  for
years—identifying   them,  encouraging  them   to   return
to  the  Government side  through the  'open  arms'  defector
program,  capturing them,  killing  them  .  .  .
Q.  How  in  the  world  do  you  identify  the  enemy?
A.  ...    We  call  it  the  'County  Fair' operation. .  .  . We
select   a  hamlet,  say   of   500  or  600  people.   We  put  a
cordon   around  that   hamlet,   usually  before   daylight.
Then   with   South   Vietnamese   troops   we   enter    the
hamlet,  assemble  all  the  people,  screen  each  individual,
move  the   people  out  of   the  hamlet  into   an   enclosure
where   we   can   start   giving   them   medical   treatment,
feeding   them  and  issuing  identity   cards.   This   takes
about  three  days."
—Interview   with   Gen.   Grcene,  commandant    of   the
Marine  Corps  in  U.S.  News  & World  Report, Sept.  5.
mitment  of  our  military  manpower  and  resources."    He  said
this  shows  what  we  must  expect  "if  similar  wars  of  aggres-
sion  or  similar  outbreaks"  should  occur  elsewhere.   He  called
for  "a  hard-headed  and  realistic  assessment  of  the  problems
with  which  we  would  be  confronted"  in  terms  of   manpower
and  resources  "if  two,  three  or  more  of  such  contingencies
should  occur   simultaneously."   These  are   the  sober  calcula-
tions  which  move  a  subcommittee  as  powerful  and  conserva-
tive    as    Stennis's   preparedness    subcommittee    of    Senate
Armed   Services.     Johnson    was   himself   chairman    of   this
subcommittee  for  many  years,  and  knows  it  will  not  be  as
easily   repelled   as  the  Senate's  divided  and  timorous   collec-
tion  of  doves.    Perhaps  this  is  why  Johnson  hastily  called  a
Cabinet  meeting  for  the  day  on  which  the  hearings   opened.
"I  understand,"  Stennis  told   Rusk  with  dry  courtliness,"
"that  since  your  appointment   with  us,  the  President  has  had
to  call  an  important  meeting  of  the  Cabinet  at  12 o'clock  and
you  have  to  leave  us  at  11:45."   The only visible  urgent  busi-
ness  was  to  blanket   the  Stennis  committee's  misgivings  be-
fore  press-time.    McNamara   was  trotted  out  to  declare  that
the  manpower  drain  of  the  Vietnamese   war  had  been   more
than  compensated   for  by  the  increase  in  over-all  strength  of
the  military  establishment.    I  suspect  this  will  prove  to  be
another  of  his  disingenuous  statements  about  the  war,   since
that  over-all  increase  could  hardly  have  compensated   for  the
Rusk's  Failure  to  Repudiate  Ky's Invasion  Proposal Protested in  the  Senate
"Mr.   President,   the   flamboyant   young   Prime   Minister,
Ky,  of  the  Saigon  government  recently  urged  that   instead
of   waging  a  long  war  to  win  a  victory  in  South  Vietnam,
North   Vietnam   should   be  invaded   by  land  forces   pouring
over   the   17th  parallel   and   from   the   sea.    This   was   an
irresponsible  statement   typical   of   the   reckless   and  brash
young  puppet  that  we  have installed  as  head  of  the  Saigon
government.   What  is  frightening is  the  fact  that  Secretary
liusk,  when  asked  to  comment on  this  statement  at  a  press
conference,   said,  'There   is   no  policy  desire   to   move   into
North  Vietnam  or  the  demilitarized zone.'   It  will  depend,
Mr.  Rusk  said,  'On  the  turn  of  events;  the  commander will
have  to  do these  things  to  protect  the  security  of  his  troops.'
"It  should  be   unthinkable  that   we   would  escalate   this
miserable  civil  war to  the  extent  of  invading  North  Vietnam
with   all   the   risks   that   such   a   move   implies.     However,
Secretary   Rusk's  refusal  to  repudiate  Ky's  statement  indi-
cates   that   in   his   mind   at   least   that    possibility   exists.
Should  that  happen,  any  chance  of  negotiating  a  cease-fire
or  armistice  in  Vietnam  would  be  seriously   jeopardized,  if
not  completely  destroyed.    We  might   very   well  find  our-
selves  on  a  collision  course  toward  war  with  Red  China,  if
not  worse.
"Mr.   President,   Administration   officials   should   at   once
put   a  stop  to  any  idea  that   we  would  seriously    consider
invading  North  Vietnam  by  land.   Such  talk  has  a  way  of
creating  a  climate of  acceptance;  before  long  the  thinkable
becomes  thinkable."
—Young   (D.  Ohio)  in  the  Senate  Aug.   23  supported   by  Senators  Gruening  and  Morse.       (Abridged).
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  5,1966
McNamara's  Naive  View  of  the  Pentagon  as  An  Educational  Institution
When  Will  RFK  Attack  Conflict  Between  Vietnam  and  War  On  Poverty?
tight  supply of  non-coms and  technicians  of  all  sorts.   When
I  was  in  Vietnam  I  saw  non-coms  who  looked  as  if  they  had
been  taken  off  the  porch  of  an  old  soldier's  home.    Five  re-
cruits  do not  make  up  for  one  Sergeant.  The  Vietnamese  war
is  absorbing   a  disproportionately  high  percentage  of  what
might  be  called   the  skilled  workers  of  the   armed   services.
China,  Too,  Sees  the  Army  As  A  School
It  is  against  this  background  that  one must  assess   Secre-
tary, McNamara's  speech  to  the  VFW  Aug.  23 discovering  the
horrors  of  poverty,  and  proposing  to  "fix  up"  for   military
service  100,000 men  a  year  currently  being  rejected  for  medi-
cal  or  educational  reasons.    Since  a  large  proportion  of  these
are  Negroes,  and  Negroes  in  combat  arms  are  already   more
than  three  times  their  proportion  of  the  population,  the  Mc-
Namara   proposal   has   evoked   bitter   reaction   from   Negro
leadership.     No  doubt  the  armed   services  have   educational
devices and  medical services  as  excellent  as  McNamara  claims
but   it   will  be  asked  why  can't  they  be  made  available   in
civilian  schools  and  health  centers.   It  may  not  be  fair  but  it
is  amusing   to   observe  that  just  when  Mao  and  Lin  Piao
praise  the  army  as  the  school  of  the  people,  McNamara  too
puts  forward  the  armed  services as  the  school  of the  rejected.
The  Pentagon   hardly   recommends  itself   as  an   educational
institution,  especially  for  a  democratic  society  and  a  peaceful
world.    However  well-intentioned   McNamara  may  be,  these
proposals  like  his  Montreal  suggestion  for  universal   service,
can  only  become  new  steps  in  the  militarization  of  American
life.    On  the  floor  of  the  House  last  Monday, Aug.  29,  Chair-
man  Mahon  of  House  Appropriations  said  that  with  the  pas-
sage  of  the  new  $58  billion  defense  bill  the  Pentagon  would
have   $100  billion  to   spend  this  fiscal  year  but  would  still
need  a  new  appropriation   "in  a  few  months,"   i.e.  after   elec-
tion,  of  "between  $5 billion  and  $15 billion."   He  advised   the
House  to  cut  all  other  appropriation   requests  as  much  as  it
reasonably  could  to  make  way  for  this  stupendous  war  budg-
et.  This  means  holding  down the  poverty  program  and  fitting
human  rehabilitation   to  the  Defense  Department's    growing
need  for  troops.  This  will  add  fresh  fuel  to  the  racial  bitter-
ness  in  our  Negro  ghettoes.
Emotionally,  financially,  politically,   the   war   on   poverty
and  the  war  in  Vietnam cannot  be  reconciled.  One  must  elim-
inate  the  other,  and  the  latter  is  clearly  winning.   The  $100
billion  dollar  tumble  in  stock  market   values  since  February
has  been  matched  at  the  bottom  of  society  by  a  less  sensa-
tional  but  more  painful  rise  in  the  cost  of  living,  especially
food,  and  a  sharp  reduction  in  housing  due  to  the   feverish
rise  in  interest  rates.    This  in  turn  is  due  to  Johnson's   un-
willingness  to  add  to  his  war's  unpopularity  by  a  boost  in
Our  Hero  Explains  Again  About Hitler
"Referring  to  earlier  reports   quoting  him  as   saying
Hitler   was   his   idol.   Premier  Ky   said   this   was   not
exactly  what  he  meant.   He  said  that  when  somebody
asked   him  what  South   Vietnam  needed   to   unify   its
people,  he  had answered  a  'strong  man'  and  had  pointed
out  that  Germany   under  Hitler  was  able  to  rise  and
grow  strong.    Besides,   he  said,  amid  laughter,   he  did
not  like  Hitler  because  'he  was  not  handsome  and  not
a  lady-killer.""
—Reuters  covering  Ky's   press  conference   in   Manila,
the  New  York  Times  international   edition,  Aug.   13-U
income  taxes.   As  Johnson's   own  popularity  falls,  his  apolo-
getics  become  sillier.    At  Denver  and  before   the   American
Legion,  he  tried  to  sell  the  war  as  if  it  were  a  global  war  on
poverty.    It  is  incredible  that  the  same  man  could  attribute
colonial  unrest  to  bad  land  tenure  systems  and  lack  of  free-
dom  while he  pours  more  men  and  money  into  the  support of
a  bankrupt  dictatorship  of  landlords  and  militarists  in  South
Vietnam.   The Latins  will  rub  their  eyes when  they  read that
the  President   said  at  Denver  that  in  Latin  America  "we  are
on  the  side  of  those  who,  year  by  year,  seek  to  enlarge  the
spectrum   of  discussion."    Have   Brazil  and   Argentina    van-
ished  from  the  White  House   maps?
The  only  good  news  out  of  Washington  is that  the  Republi-
cans  have  begun  to  talk  out  of both  sides  of  their  mouth—as
in  the  Korean  war,  they  are  now  both  hawk  and  dove—and
that  Bobby  Kennedy  is  outdistancing  Johnson  in  the  opinion
polls,  LBJ's  tenderest  spot.   But  those  who see  Kennedy  tak-
ing  the  nomination  from  Johnson   in  1968  are  dreaming   the
most   unlikely  dreams.    Long   before   any   such   improbable
outcome  looms  into  view,  it  is  more  likely  that  Johnson  may
offer   Kennedy  second   place  on  the  ticket—and  that,  too,   is
an  outsize  possibility.    Kennedy  is  being  careful  not  to  burn
his  bridges  with  the  White  House  and  make  such  a  develop-
ment  impossible.    He  has  said  very  little  about  the  war  in
months,  and  his  eloquent  statement   on  urban   renewal   and
Negro  needs at  the  Ribicoff  hearings  Aug.  15 was  noteworthy
by  its   adoption   of  the   Keyserling-AFL-CIO   line  that   the
growth  in  gross  national  product  makes  it  possible  to  fight
both  the  war  abroad   and  poverty  at  home.    The  convulsion
in  the  stock  and  bond  markets  is  only  the  most  striking  evi-
dence  that  there   is  something  wrong  with  this  arithmetic.
Kennedy  will  prove  his  mettle  only  when  he  is  bold  enough
to  break  with  it.
How Saigon University Students Feel About the  U.S. and the  Ky Regime's Elections
Saigon  University students,  aroused by  what they  regard
as  a  moral  decline,  today  demanded  an  end  to  the  "escala-
tion" of  marriages between U.S.  servicemen  and Vietnamese
girls.   The  students  called  for  an  end  to  intermarriages   in
a  meeting  today  in  which  they  also  called  for  an  end  to
the  war  and  solution  of   the  economic,  political  and  social
problems  it  has  caused.  They  called  for  a  deadline  on  the
presence  of  foreign  troops  in  South  Vietnam  and  said  that
other  nations  were  using  their  country  as  "a  playing  card."
In   addition   to   demanding   a   written   guarantee  of   the
removal   of   foreign   troops  by   unspecified   date,  they  said
the  government  should  require  foreign  troops  to  be  quar-
tered   "in  some  separate  areas."   The   students   criticized
recent  economic  moves by  the  government,  stating  that  tax
increases  and  devaluation  of   the   piastre   had  hurt  middle
class  Vietnamese.  They  also  criticized  the  government for
allowing  Filipinos  and  Koreans to  work  for  U.S. companies
in  Vietnam while  Vietnamese  workers needed  jobs.
On  the  U.S.  foreign  aid  program,  the  students  said  the
Vietnamese   government   should   be   free   to   choose   what
Vietnam  needs  "instead  of  being  directed by  the  U.S.  gov-
ernment."   The  statement  also  called  on  the  government  to
release   students   who   were   arrested   during    the   recent
political  crisis.   They  said  the  innocent  should  be  set   free
and   the   guilty   prosecuted  instead   of   being  drafted   into
the  Army.
On  the  election  of  a  Constituent  Assembly  scheduled  for
September,  the  students  said  they   would  take  a  wait-and-
see  attitude  to   find  out  if   the  government  carries  out   the
balloting   honestly   before  deciding   whether  to  support  the
results.
—Saigon  I'ost, Aug. 9,   Ifliiti.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's Weekly,  September  5,1966
LBJ's  Claim  Our  Aircraft  Losses  Less  Than  Expected  Is   Contradicted
London   Times  Military  Expert  Reveals Sober  Facts Kept  From  Us At  Home
"I  don't  see  any  change  for  the  worse  at  all.    Our  plane
losses  are  under  those  that- we  have  estimated."
—LBJ   at   a  news   conference   August   9,  two  days    after
we  had  lost  7  planes  in  one  day  over  North  Vietnam.
"The   loss  of  seven  American  fighter  bombers   over   North
Vietnam  in  one  day—the  highest  figure   since  the  bombing
started—underlines  the   fact   that,  militarily  speaking,  the
U.S.  is  not  winning  the  air  war  over  North   Vietnam.    The
political  constraints  on  the  choosing  of  targets,  the  improved
air  defense  of  North  Vietnam,  the  rapid  powers  of  recovery
of  the  North  Vietnamese,  and  the  high  value  of  American
aircraft  in  relation  to  the  targets  they  engage, all  combine to
create  a  serious  situation  for  the  United  States.
Swift  Repair  Work
"From   the  military  point  of  view  the   bombing  of   North
Vietnam  is  not  having  more  than  a  marginal   effect  on  that
country's  ability to  wage  war  in the  south.   It  may,  in  Presi-
dent  Johnson's  words,  'raise  the  price  of aggression'  but  it  is
not  stopping  it,  as  the  ability  of  the  North  Vietnamese  to
repair  their  lines  of  communication, or  find  new  ones,  seems
to  outdistance  the  American  ability   to  destroy  roads,  rail-
ways  and  bridges  once  and  for   all.
"The   Americans  have   now  lost   326  aircraft   over   North
Vietnam,  mainly  from   ground   fire.   Russian   missiles   have
accounted   for   about   15,  and   Soviet   MIG   fighters   for   even
fewer.    The  chief  importance of  the  missiles  .so  far  has  been
twofold.   It  has  reduced the  'safe'  areas  for flying over  North
Vietnam  until  they  hardly  exist.    The  missiles,  whose   most
effective  range  is  over  10,000  feet,  have  forced  the  American
aircraft   to  stay   down  at  a  height   which  brings   them   into
range   of  radar-controlled  anti-aircraft   fire,   and  even  small
arms   fire.   American  aircraft   now  have  to  fly  in  from   the
sea  at   an  intermediate height—ready  to  duck  down  if   the
pilots  spot  an  enemy missile,  but  high  enough  to  restrict  the
amount  of  ground  fire.  The  high  performance  aircraft   have
prpven   less  able  to  sustain   damage   from   ground   fire   than
their  predecessors  of  the  Second  World  War.
"A  highly  intense  electronic  warfare  is  also  being  waged
by  both  sides,  with  efforts  to  jam  each  other's  radars.  So  far
the  North Vietnamese have  not  been  able  successfully  to  con-
fuse  the  American  bombers'  radar,  any  more  than  the  Amer-
icans  have  been  able  to  throw  radar-controlled   anti-aircraft
fire  off  target.  The Americans are  also  finding that  the  North
Vietnamese  have  retimed  the  fuses  of  their  shells  to  explode
at  a  much  lower  level  than   previously.
"The  air  defense  in  North  Vietnam has  improved  so  much
More  Bombing  To  Cover  Up  Failure?
"Faced  with  an  increasingly  expensive  total  of  air-
craft  losses,  and  no  tangible  political  or  military  gain
to  show  for  it,  the  Administration may  find  it  hard not
to  react  by  ordering  the  bombing  of  more  "lucrative"
targets  to  justify  their  losses  and  bring  stronger  pres-
sure  on  Hanoi.    The  main  danger  lies  in  the  fact  that
the  failure  of  the  first  bombing  phase  has  not  warned
Washington  that  the  solution  to  the  problem  does  not
necessarily  lie  on  the  next  rung  up  the  ladder."
—An  editorial  in The Times  (London),  Aug. 9.
that  the  reconnaissance  aircraft,  which  used  to  be  able  to fly
alone  at  low level,  now  have  to  be  accompanied  by  a  fighter
bomber  ready  to  keep  the  enemy's  heads  down  should  anti-
aircraft  fire  start  up.   All these  factors  are  beginning  to take
their  toll  on  the  American  air  effort.    The  losses  of  326 rep-
resent  more  than  the  total  number of aircraft  at  present com-
mitted  to  that  role.    THE  ATTRITION   RATE   OF  LOST
AIRCRAFT  IS  ABOUT HALF  AGAIN AS  HIGH  AS  WAS
ORIGINALLY  EXPECTED,  with  the   consequent  scarcities
of  men  and  machines, and  demands  for  a  higher  level  of  re-
inforcements  than  has  yet  been  possible.
"It  may  seem  strange  that  the  American  aircraft  have  to
fly  so  many  sorties—26,000  in  1965—for   such  limited  dam-
age.    This  is  explained by  the  fact  that  most  roads,  railways
and  bridges   seem  to  be  repaired   or  replaced   by  the   North
Vietnamese  within  48 hours  of  their  being  bombed.   For  in-
stance,  IN  1965 THE  RAILWAY LINES  WERE  CUT MORE
THAN   500  TIMES,   BUT   THEY   HAVE   NEVER   BEEN
KEPT  CLOSED FOR  LONG.   But  each  sortie  over  a  target
may  easily  result  in  the  loss  of  one aircraft,  costing  almost
$1  million  in  return  for  achieving  a  limited  objective  which
will  have  to  be  regained  in  two  days  time.
"If  the  Russians  were  to  deploy their  most  modern  missiles
in  Vietnam,  and  in  more  numbers  than  now,  the   American
administration  would  be  forced  to  make  a  profound  decision.
They  would  either  have  to  order  the  bombing  of  more  im-
portant  installations,   such  as  power  plants,   docks  and  fac-
tories,  in  the  hope  that  this  would  have  a  more   noticeable
effect   not  only  on  North  Vietnam's   conduct  of  the   war   in
the  South,  but  on  Hanoi's  own  attitude   toward   negotiation,
or  else  they  would have  to  reduce  the  bombing  in  the  knowl-
edge that  it  had  bee"n  both  a  political  and a  military  failure."
[Emphasis  added.]
—Defense   Correspondent,  The  Times  (London),  Aug. 9.
Help That  New Student Off  to College With A Sub to The Weekly
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew  (or  enter)
Street   ...................................
City  ........................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name  .........................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,
Washington,  D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a   sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
... Zip..........State.........
a  gift  sub  to:
City  ............................................  Zip..........State........
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  D
7/25/66
Fifties
5618    Nebraska  Aye.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week  in  December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave..   N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
SIS  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED