I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966mar07.pdf

============================================================

Justice  Black,  The Negro and  Jefferson,    P.  2
The  War  May  Be  Going  Badly  But  Saigon's  Business  Men  Are  Enjoying  A  Boom
"There  is  still  money  to  be  made  in  South  Vietnam,  and
business  men  there  generally  are  doing  well—since  the flow
of  aid  money  is  vast.  However  the  tendency  of  the  money
to  collect  in  a  few   hands  makes  it   difficult   for   the  native
small  and  medium-sized  business.    Profits  are  being  trans-
ferred  to   Hong  Kong  and  Switzerland.  .  .  .  Most  of  the
$122    million  in  American aid  slated  for  the  second  quarter
will  not  leave  Saigon,  except  in  the  form  of  profits  taken
out  of  the  country  altogether."
—Whaley-Eaton  Service  in  the  Washington  Star, Feb.  27.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  9MARCH  7,   1966
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.
16   CENTS
The  Fallout  Danger  in  Any  Nuclear  Attack  on  China
Escalation  is on  its way, and  we  see  no  way to  stop  it.   Now
is  the  time  to  organize  public  opinion  against  the  ultimate
escalation,  the   use  of  nuclear  weapons.     In   this  connection
we  would  like  to  call  attention  to  an  exchange  on  the  subject
in  the  newly  released  and  heavily  censored  testimony  on  the
supplemental  Vietnam  war  bill  before  Senate  Armed  Services
and   Appropriations  subcommittees.    At  page   107  Secretary
McNamara   is   asked   by   Senator  Margaret   Chase   Smith  of
Maine,   "Under   what  conditions  would  you  use  tactical  nu-
clear  weapons  in  Vietnam?"    His  answer  was  "I  can't  con-
ceive  of  any  in  which  we  would  use  them  in  South  Vietnam."
Later  at  page  129  Senator  Mundt  asked,  "You  say,  'We  can't
conceive  of  any  condition  where  we  would  use  tactical nuclear
weapons  in  Vietnam.'?"    The  rest  of  Senator  Mundt's   ques-
tion  and  the  first  part  of   Secretary  McNamara's   reply  were
deleted  by  the  censor.    All  he  left  in  was,  "This  morning  I
said  that  we  didn't  at  present   conceive  of   any  circumstance
in  which  we  would  use  nuclear  weapons  in  South   Vietnam."
(Our  italics).    This  does  not  bar  the  use  of  tactical  nuclear
weapons  against North  Vietnam  or  China,  nor  even  in  South
Vietnam  under  other  circumstances.
Incineration  By  Other Means
The  time may'come  when  it  will  be  argued  that  after  all  it
is  no  worse  to  burn  people  up  by  atomic  incineration than  by
napalm.    If  the  innocent  die  with  the  guilty,  well  it's  better
(we  may be  told)  to  be  radioactively dead  than  possibly  Red.
Now  we  want  to  raise a  question  no  one,  so  far  as  we  know,
has  raised  before.    What  happens  when  the  clouds  of  radio-
active  dust  move  from  the  battlefields  to  the  cities  of  nearby
friendly   and  allied  countries  like  South   Korea,   Japan,   For-
mosa  and  the  Philippines?    This  is  a  good  time  to  remember
the  horror  and  panic  which  spread  in  Japan  when  the  deadly
ash  from  one  H-bomb  explosion   some  5,000  miles  away  fell
on  the  fishing  boat  the  Flying  Dragon  in  1954.     Atmospheric
nuclear  explosions  were  later   stopped   by  agreement   because
of  the  danger  to  world  health.    What  happens   if  the   U.S.,
instead  of  an  occasional  experimental  explosion,   really  began
in  earnest  to  drop  bombs  on  China?   What  will  be  the  reac-
tion   when   the   fallout   sickens  people  in   Soviet  Asia?    Or
Western  Europe?   Or—as  the  deadly clouds  move  all  the way
Four-Star Misinformation
Sen.  Young   (R.  N.  Dak):  The  desertion  rate  of   the
South  Vietnamese  a  year  or  so  ago,  I  understand,  was
quite  high.   Is  the  desertion  rate  decreased  .  .  .?
Gen.   Harold  K.  Johnson  (Chief  of  Staff,  U.S.  Army):
.  .  .  There  has  been  an  improvement  in  the  course  of
the  last  year  in  the  desertion  rate  [deleted].
—Newly   released  and  heavily  censored  testimony  an
the    supplemental    Vietnam   war    bill    before    Senate
Armed  Services  and  Appropriations   Comm., Jan.  24.
Saigon,  Feb.  23—About  96,000  men  deserted  from  the
South   Vietnamese  armed   forces   last   year,   a   total
equivalent   to  nearly  half  of   the  American   force  that
has   been   committed  to   the   defense   of   this   country.
Actually  the  figure  reported  by  the  South  Vietnamese
government   was  higher,  but  informed   sources   said   it
did  not  take  into  account  the  fact  that  some  of  the  de-
serters  had  later  reenlisted.   .  .  .  Total  desertions   for
1965   were  put  at  113,000.   Desertions  from  the  regular
armed  forces  nearly  doubled  during  the  last  year.
—Neil  Sheehan  in  the  New   York   Times,  Feb.  24.
round  the  globe—the  USA?
We   suggest   that  scientists  the  world  over,  particularly  in
Japan,  begin  to  estimate  the  amount  of  fallout  which  would
be  created  by  various  levels  of   nuclear  attack  by  us  on   the
mainland  of  Asia.    In  our  own  country  minor  seepages  from
underground   explosions   in  Nevada   several  years  ago  caused
an   alarming   increase   in    radioactive   iodine    almost    three
thousand  miles  to  the  west  in  New  York  State.    Up  to  now
we have  thought  only of  a war  between  the  two  nuclear  giants,
US  and  USSR,  which  would  devastate  both.    So  horrible   is
the  outlook   that  neither  has  bothered  to  consider  what   the
fallout  would  do  to  the  countries  in  between  them.    But  nu-
clear  war  by  us  on  a  country  like  China,  with  few  bombs  of
its  own,  would  be  a  nuclear  war  of  very  different   dimensions.
In  it,  so we  calculate,  we could  wreck  China  with  little  damage
to  ourselves.    In  smug  contemplation   of  this  easy  victory,  no
one  has  stopped  to  think  of  what  the  fallout  might  do  to  our-
selves  and  others.    Do  we  build  fallout  shelters  to  protect  us
from  the  byproducts  of  our  war  on  China?    Can  we  attack
China  with  nuclear  weapons  on  the  scale  so  huge  a  country
requires  without   danger   to  others   and   ourselves?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  7,1966
A   Friendly   Disagreement   With   A   Great   Justice   on  His  80th  Birthday
It's  Not  The  Negro  Who  Needs  to  Be Told  About   Jefferson
We  greet  Mr.  Justice  Black  with  reverence  and  gratitude
on  his  80th  birthday and  hope  that  he  will  break  the  record
set by Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  who  served  until  90.    Mr.  Jus-
tice  Black  has  become  the  greatest  civil  libertarian  ever  to  sit
on  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court.    We  are  sorry  to  spoil  the  occa-
sion  by disagreeing  with  him  on  his  latest  dissent.    When  we
heard   of   his   impassioned  outburst   in  the   Louisiana  library
sit-in  case,  we  sat  down  to  read  it,  prepared  to  be  persuaded.
We  have long  thought  civil  disobedience  a dangerous  weapon,
though  like  certain  poisons  it  may  sometimes  be  medicinal  if
taken  in  careful  doses.    We  who  applaud  the  weapon  when
used  by SNCC or  CORE,  would  be  quick  to  condemn  it  when
used  by  the  Klan  or  the  Birch  Society.    So  we  were  prepared
to  hear  a  warning  from  Mr.  Justice  Black.
Hardly  A  Mob  Scene
But  after  reading  the  four  separate  opinions  of  the  Court
in  Brown  v.  Louisiana,  we  find  Mr.  Justice  Black's  mighty
admonitions  completely  out  of  proportion  to  the  actual  facts.
"The   crowd  moved  by  noble  ideals  today,"  Mr.  Justice  Black
thundered,  "can  become  the  mob  ruled  by  hate  and   passion
and   greed   and   violence  tomorrow."     So  it  can,  and   it  can
then  be  dealt  with  for  breach  of  the  peace  or  worse.    But  the
five polite  young  Negroes  who  staged  a  quiet  sit-in at  a  segre-
gated   Louisiana  library   bore   no  resemblance  whatsoever  to
a  mob.    The  inescapable  fact  is  that  if  they  had  been  white
men   the   Sheriff   would   not   have   arrived   within   10  or   15
minutes  to  arrest  them.     "Petitioners  while  in  the  library,"
the  dissent  admits,  "never  talked in  unusually loud  voices  and
used  no  bad  language."    -It  is  hard  to  connect  this  with  Mr.
Justice  Black's  grandiloquent  language   about   "the   Marseil-
laise  .  ,  .  when  a  noble  revolution  gave  way  to  rule  by suc-
cessive  mobs  until  chaos  set  in."    Even  the  unconditional sur-
render  of  the  Clinton, La
;
,  book  Bastille  to  integration  would
still  be  a  measurable  distance from  chaos.
Mr.  Justice  Black,  it  is  clear  from  this  and  several  recent
cases,  is  rendered  queasy by  sit-ins.    It  is  natural for  one  who
prizes  the  First  Amendment  above  all  else  to  be  suspicious
of   efforts   to  change  law  and  custom  not  by  the  debate  and
persuasion  it  protects  but  by  a  kind  of  force,  however  peace-
ful.     But  the  First  Amendment,  ideal  and  splendid  as  it  is,
An  Evil   Harbinger
Soviet  intellectuals  and  Soviet  Jews  will  be  chilled  to
read  Izvestia's  praise  (Feb.   25)  of  Andrei  Zhdanov  as
"a  true   son  of   the   people."    Coming  in  the   wake  of
the  Sinyavsky-Daniel  trial,  it  will  be  taken  as  a  signal
of  bad  times  ahead.    It  was  Zhdanov  who  ran  Stalin's
post-war   witch  hunt  against  the  intellectuals.    He  be-
gan  it  in  1946  with  an  attack  on  the  satirist   Zoshchenko
and   the   poet   Akhmatova   and  soon   began   to   fill   the
labor  camps  with   editors  and  writers.    The  campaign
culminated  in  anti-Semitic  attacks  on  writers  of  Jewish
origin   as   "rootless  cosmopolitans."    A   whole   genera-
tion  of  Jewish  writers  in  Russian  and  in  Yiddish  were
liquidated,  as  Babel,  Pilnyak  and  Mandelstam   had  been
in  the  earlier  purges  of  the  30s.    No  regime  in  history
ever   killed  so  many   of   its  finest  writers.    The  Soviet
press  has  never  acknowledged  openly  and  fully  the   ter-
rible  record  of  those  years.    Many  of  the  honored  dead
have  yet  to  be  rehabilitated,   but  Zhdanov,   the  main  in-
strument   of   all  this   moral   monstrosity,  is  now   paid
posthumous  honor.  This  will  be  interpreted  in  the   Sov-
iet   Union   as   a  sign   of   movement    back   toward  that
strict  party  control  of  the  arts  responsible  for  so  much
stupidity   and  cruelty  in  the  past.    It's   hard  to   fathom
the  mentality  which  would  hail  Zhdanov  as  its  true   son.
has  its  limitations.    The  Negro  cannot  speak   freely   in   the
South,  and  even  if  he  could,  he  could  speak  from  now   to
doomsday   without   ever   persuading   Southern   white   supre-
macists.    The  sit-in  has  done  more  in  a  few  years  than  per-
suasion  could  do  in  a  century.
The  underdog  can  be  asked  to  limit  himself  to  freedom  of
speech  only  when  the  master  class or  race  shows  itself  willing
to  listen.   But  the  South  gave  up  Jeffersonianism,  with  all  its
implications,  long  ago.    The  South  began  to  turn  its  back  on
the  great  Virginian  as  far  back  as  the  1830s  lest  his  teachings
disturb  slavery.  It  has  made  the  South  literally unliveable  for
any   man,  white   or   black,   who   questioned   slavery  then   or
white  supremacy now.    The  South  is  a  lonely  and  dangerous
place  to  this  day  for   any  man   who   dares   speak  his  mind
on  the  South's  peculiar institution.   It's  not  the  kids  of  CORE
and  SNCC  who  need  to  be  told  about  the  First  Amendment.
It's   the   Sheriff,   and   he'd   probably   dismiss   it   as   Yankee
Communism.
How   To  Have  a  Desegregated  School  Without  Enrolling  Any  Negroes
Two  recent  reports  of  the  U.S.   Civil  Rights  Commission
document  the  results  of  ineffectual  enforcement   of  Title  VI
of  the  1964  Civil  Rights  Act.    A  Southern   and  border  state
school  survey   turned   up  102  counties  with  approved    "de-
segregation"  plans  where  no  Negroes  are  enrolled  in  school
with  whites!    In  Alabama,  Mississippi   and  Louisiana  barely
'/2   of   1%  of   Negro  children  have   been   integrated.     With
respect  to  health  and  welfare  services  the  story  is  much  the
same.   Some  state  hospitals   are  wholly  segregated;  others
assign  Negroes  to  separate  rooms  and wards.    Many  doctors
tied   to   federally   supported    programs   maintain    separate
waiting  rooms.    And,  Negroes  are  still  excluded  from  many
child  care  institutions,   nursing   homes  and  training   facili-
ties.    Schools,  hospitals  and  welfare  programs  are  no  longer
publicly  or  officially  segregated.   In  practice,  they  generally
remain  so.
Officials  at  the  Departments  of  Justice   and  Health,   Edu-
cation,   and  Welfare   insist   more   vigorous   enforcement    of
Title  VI  is  in  the  offing.    They  promise  larger,  more   effici-
ent  staffs;   increased   investigations  and  field  trips;   tighter
guidelines  and  an  elaborate  system  of  compliance  reports  by
local  administrators.    But  when  it  comes to  penalties,  Wash-
ington  loses  its  nerve.    The  traditional,   and  so  far  ineffec-
tive,   means   of   warnings,   negotiations  and  court  suits  are
favored  over  the  termination  of  Federal  assistance.  To  date,
although  a  number  of  the  most  flagrant  violators  of  the  civil
rights  law  have  been   called  to  hearings,   none   has  lost   its
Federal  funds.    Justice  and  HEW  contend  that  terminating
funds  would  merely  strengthen  the  resistance   of  the   South-
erners.     How  do  they   know?     Cutting   off  funds   is,   after
all,  Section  602  of  the  Civil  Rights  Act.    It  should   at  least
be  tried.—P.O.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  7,1966
The  Senate's  Indifference  to  Johnson's  Swing   Toward   Military  Dictators
This  is Why   Huge  Brazil  May  Some  Day  Become  Another  Vietnam
Two   symbols  of   the   new  Johnsonian   orientation  toward
military   dictatorship  in   the   hemisphere  were   confirmed  to
office  by  the  Senate  Feb.  25,  in  an  almost  empty  chamber,  on
a   voice  vote,   without  discussion,  except   for   one   speech   in
opposition,  by  Senator  Morse,   to  his  great  credit.    One  was
Jack   Hood   Vaughan   to   become   head   of   the   Peace   Corps.
The   other   was  Lincoln  Gordon   to  succeed  Vaughan  as  As-
sistant  Secretary of  State  for  Inter-American Affairs.   Vaughan
has   become   an   apologist   for   military   take-over,  Gordon   as
Ambassador  to  Brazil  favored   the  overthrow  of   its  constitu-
tional  President  by a  cabal  of  the  military, the  landed  oligarchy
and  urban  property.     Some  day  as  a  result  we  may  have  to
send  troops  into  this  huge  country.
Democracy   Not  For   Export?
Our  instant  support  of  the  military  was  regarded  as  signal-
ling  the  end  of   "Kennedyism"   (as  Le  Monde   said  at   the
time)   but  Gordon   was  warmly  endorsed  by  Senator  Edward
M.   Kennedy.     Two   years   ago,   just  before   Goulart's   over-
throw,  Brazil  was  at  a  cross-roads.    A  Congress   elected   by  a
restricted   franchise   and   dominated   by   the   rural   oligarchy
had   blocked   the  agrarian  and  tax  reforms  we  claim  to  sup-
port.     Democracy   either   had   to   be  widened   or   restricted.
Goulart  wanted  to  widen  it  by giving  Brazil's  illiterate  Negro
majority  the  right  to  vote.    This  would  have  given   Goulart
a   Congress   favoring    social   reform.      The   resemblance   to
Johnson's  Voting Rights  Act  is  obvious  but  Gordon,  Rusk  and
Johnson  all  came  down  on  the  anti-democratic  side  in  Brazil.
For  some  strange   reason   Morse   at  the  time  praised   John-
son's  message  hailing  Goulart's  overthrow  as a  victory  for  con-
stitutional  government.    Morse's  position  now  is that  Goulart
should  have  been  impeached  instead  of  overthrown!    Gordon
at  the  confirmation  hearing   before  Senate  Foreign  Relations
was  allowed   to  get  away  with  a  very  distorted   presentation
of  what  happened   in  Brazil.    Morse  asked  Gordon   to  men-
tion   examples   of  how  Goulart   was  trying  to  rule  unconsti-
tutionally.     Gordon   referred   to   the   agrarian  reform   decree
Goulart   signed   just   before   his   overthrow   as   "without   any
legal,   any  statutory,  basis."    This  is  untrue.    Goulart,   with
his   land   reform   program    blocked   in   Congress,    seized   in
desperation   on  an  unused  22-year-old  law  allowing  the   gov-
ernment  to  requisition  land  in  a  six-mile  zone  along  roads,
railways  and  canals.   This  was  to  be  the  basts  for  a  first  token
Curious   Way  to  Be  Constructive
'My  broad  view  on  this  subject  is  that  armed  forces
in   Latin   America   have   significant,   constructive,   and
important  functions  to  perform."
—Mr.   Gordon   to  Sen.   Foreign  Relations,  Feb.   7.
"I  still  maintain  that  the  element  in  Brazilian  public
life  which  had  been  the  most  enthusiastic   advocates   of
social   reform  were   the  identical  elements   from   whom
all   political  rights   were   stripped."
—Sen.  Gore  to  Mr.  Gordon  at  that  same  hearing.
"To  ensure  against  the  return  to  public  office  of   ele-
ments  unacceptable  to  the  military command,  more  than
200   prominent   public  men   [in   Brazil]   were    divested
...  of  voting  and  office-holding  rights  for  ten  years.
Those  proscribed   politically  included  former  Presidents
Goulart,  Kubitschek,  and  Quadros. ...  By  no  stretch
of  the  imagination  was  the  purge  merely  anti-Commu-
nist,  for  it  included  anyone  the  military  command  hap-
pened  to  disapprove   of."
—Generals  v.  Presidents:   Neo-Militarism   in  Latin
America,  by  Edwin  Lieirwen  (Praeger:   1964).
grant   of   land  to  the  landless.
A   second   incredible  episode   in  Morse's  interrogation   was
the  little  speech  he  delivered  on  the  virtues  of  private  invest-
ment  in  Latin  America  and  the  importance of  "exporting  our
system  of  economic  freedom."     This  will  make  sour  reading
in  Brazil.    There  the  first  big  dividend  for  U.S.  interests  in
the  military  takeover  was  the  granting  to  George  H.   Hum-
phrey,  Ike's  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and  a  Goldwater  fat  cat,
of  iron  ore  concessions  opposed  by  the  nationalist right,   the
liberal-left  in  Brazil  and  even  a  majority  of  Castelo   Branco's
own  military council.    Gordon   accompanied  John  J.   McCloy,
Humphrey's   counsel,   to  Branco's   office   when   McCloy   asked
restoration   of   the   cone    sions   (cancelled   in   1962   with   an
appeal  still  pending in  the  Brazilian  Supreme  Court).    "After
presenting  Mr.  McCloy,"  a  New   York   Times   dispatch   Nov.
7,   1964   reported   meaningfully,   "Ambassador   Gordon    paid
President   Branco  a  second   visit  outlining  the   U.S.   financial
and  economic  mission  to  Brazil."    Brazil  became  the  favored
Latin  recipient  of  U.S.  aid  and  Humphrey  got  the  iron  de-
posits.    This  is  how  we  export   "economic  freedom"   in   the
hemisphere.     When  even  so  good  a  friend   as  Morse   is  so
easily  taken  in,  the  Latins  must  despair  of  us.
The  Immaculate  Conception  Of  Brazil's  Military  Dictatorship
Sen.  GORE:  I  am  particularly  concerned   with   the   part
you  may  have  played,  if  any,  in  encouraging,  promoting  or
causing  that   overthrow   [of   Goulart  in  Brazil].
Mr.   Lincoln  GORDON:  The   movement  which  overthrew
President    Goulart   was   a   purely   100%—not   99.44%—but
100%   purely   Brazilian  movement.    Neither   the  American
Embassy  nor  I  personally  [as  Ambassador]  played  any  part
in  the  process  whatsoever.  .  .  .  Neither  I  nor  other  officials
of   the   U.S.  Government,  nor  the  Government in  any  way,
shape  or  manner  was   involved.  .  .  .
Sen.  GORE:  Do  you  include  the  CIA  in  your  answer?
Mr.  GORDON:  Yes.    In  the  Brazilian  situation  .  .  .  there
was  no  lack  of  coordination,  and  there  is  none,  among   the
CIA  personnel,  the  military  attaches   .  .  .  and  the  Ambas-
sador.    This  was  and  is  all  one  team.
—Before   Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee   Feb.  7
"People  have  not  forgotten  the  comings   and  goings  of
the  American  military  attache, Gen.  Vernon  Walters,  at  the
homes  of   certain  Brazilian  higher  'officers   who   played   an
important   role   in   the   movement  of   March,  1964    [which
overthrew  Goulart].  .  .  .  And  finally  one  cannot  forget  the
program  of  American  aid  to  the  Brazilian  police  which,  it
is  said,  in  return  for  certain  supplies,  handed  over  to   (he
American  Embassy   the  police  records  of  thousands  of  Bra-
zilian   citizens."—Dispatch   from   flrazil    on  Gordon's   testi-
mony,  in  Le  Monde  (Paris),   February   11.
3 ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  7,1966
Humphrey  and  Kennedy  Neck-and-Neck  When  It  Comes  to  Spinelessness
That  Blank  Check  Congress Just  Signed Is For A Collision Course With China
It's  easy  to  risk  death  in  battle  for  one's  country,  and  even
easier  to  send  others  out  to  die.  But  it's hard  to  stand   up
against  the  warlike  minority  and  the  sheeplike  herd,  and  risk
one's   political  future   because  you  feel  your  country's   youth
and  welfare  are  at  stake.    You   can  read  this  in  Thucydides
and  you  can  read  this  in  yesterday's papers.    It  is  no  surprise
that  when   the  chips  were  down   so  few  Congressmen   voted
against  the  rising  tide  of  war.
Another   30  Years  War
Two  Senators,  Morse  and  Gruening,  were  the  only  ones  to
pass  that  test  fully.    Three  others,   Fulbright,  McCarthy  and
Young  of  Ohio  joined  them  in  the  effort  to  rescind  the  blank
check  for  war  given  the  President  in  the  Tonkin  Bay  resolu-
tion.    Four  Congressmen,  Burton  and   Brown  of  California,
Conyers   of   Michigan   and   Wm.   Fitts   Ryan   of   New   York
joined   Morse  and  Gruening  in  voting  against  the  new $4.8
billion  bill  for  the  Vietnamese war,  another  blank  check,  this
time  for  a wider war.   And  that  wider  war—as  McNamara  has
been  indicating  for  several months—is  war  with  China.  What
this  may  portend  was  indicated  by  a  leading  French   military
expert   on   atomic  war, Col. F.  O.   Mischke,  who   wrote   in
"Nene.t   Europa"   (Baden-Baden, March  1),   that  we  face  the
prospect  of  a   30  years  war   in  Southeast  Asia  "in  which   the
number  of  partisans  will  reach  20  or  30  million men.    China
will  be  the  winner."  Even  if  he  is  wrong  and  we  emerge  the
winner,   the   cost   will   exceed  any  possible  national  interest.
The  Senator  who  failed  the  test  most  miserably was  Robert
F.  Kennedy.    The  St.  Lot/is-Posl  Distich  (Feb. 27)   urged
that  he  follow  up  his  statement  of  the  previous  Saturday  by
embodying  its  main  points  in  a  Senate  resolution.    The Sen-
ate  almost  always  "consents"   but  rarely  uses  its  constitutional
power  to  advise.   This  was  an  historic chance  for  an  advisory
resolution   embodying   Kennedy's   view  that   any   negotiation
"must  accept  the  fact  that  there  are  discontented  elements   in
South  Vietnam,  Communist  and  non-Communist,  who  desire
to  change  the  existing  political and  economic  system  of  their
country"  and  offer  them  "a  share  of  power  and  responsibility"
as  the  price  of   calling  off  the  rebellion.     Such   a   resolution
Almost  Feeble  Enough  for  LBJ
We   are   appalled   at   the   feeble   character    of    the
Voters'  Pledge  Campaign  initiated  by the  National  Com-
mittee  for  A  Sane  Nuclear   Policy.    Under  the  co-chair-
manship  of  Norman  Thomas   and  the  Rev.  Wm.  Sloane
Coffin,  this  is  to  culminate  in  an  April  30  convention  in
Washington   to   support   Congressional   candidates   who
favor  a  peaceful  settlement  in  Vietnam.    With  all  due
respect  to  the  co-chairmen,  the  pledge  is  so  weak  that
it   can   easily   be   blanketed    by   one   of   those   familiar
Lyndon  Johnson  statements  that  his  critics  really  agree
with  him.  Of  its   three   points,   the  last   two,  on  the
use  of  international  agencies  for  peace  and  on  construc-
tive  economic  and  social  programs  at  home  and  abroad,
represent   no  departure  from   the   Administration   line.
Point  1 says,  "For  U.S.  steps  to  scale  down  the  fighting
and  achieve  a  cease-fire;   for  U.S. initiatives  to  encour-
age   negotiations   with   all   concerned   parties   including
the  Vietcong   (NLF);  and  for  a  settlement   which per-
mits   the   Vietnamese   people   freely   to  work   out   their
own  future."    Johnson  can  claim  that  he  is  for  all  of
this  except  a  scaling-down  of  the  fighting.   Even  in  this
he  can  point  to  at  least  one  offer  of  de-escalation.     For
a   man  who  has   talked  peace  while   widening  war   as
cleverly   as   Johnson,   this   pledge   is  an  easy   mark  for
slick  capture.    We  urge  pressure  for  a  stronger  pledge.
would  have  avoided,  for  the  timid,  a  frontal   clash  with   the
Johnson   Administration  and   could  be  represented   as  a  way
of   widening  the   President's   options.     The   debate  over   the
resolution,  even  though  finally  defeated,   would   have  helped
educate   the   country  and   put   a   brake   on   escalation.      But
Kennedy,  who  looked   like  a  first-rate  fumbler   on   Face   the
Nation,   proved   to  be  neither   hawk   nor   dove   but   chicken.
That  rival  liberal  of  his, Humphrey,   has  turned  out  to  be
a   glib   and   cheerful   pyromaniac.     His   old   friend,    James
Wechsler,  in  his  New   York   Post  column   (March   1)   sadly
exhumed   the   Vice   President's    intrview   with   Tad   Szulc  in
the  New   York   Times   (Sept.  13,  1964) at  the  beginning  of
the  presidential  campaign.    Then  Humphrey  said  of  Vietnam,
"the   present   struggle   is  a   conflict  between   Vietnamese  of
various  political  beliefs;  no  lasting  solutions  can  be  found  by
foreign  armies."    Yet  here  we  go.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly     5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
3/7/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fi/ttet
Indicate  if  announcement   wished  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except   in   August,   the  last   week   in   December   and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weckly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W., Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by   I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the   U.S.:  $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   ratea:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia   and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED