I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jan10.pdf

============================================================

Revealing  Two  Other  Rejected  Peace  Feelers from  Hanoi,  P.  2
Two  Items  Which  Set  the  Military  and  Political  Scene  for  the  New  Year
'The  crux  of  that  [the military  situation]  is  that  Amer-
ican  and  South  Vietnamese  forces  hold  less  territory  than
they  did  a  year  ago  despite  the  growth  of  the  American
forces."
—Jack  Foisie  from  Saigon  in  Washington  Post  Dec.  26
"A  Freshman  House  Democrat  from  the  Midwest,  typical
of  three  score  first-termers  on  whom  the  White  House  de-
pended  for  its  1965 majorities,  reports:  'I  went  back  home
to  tell  my people about aid to  education and depressed  areas
and  sick  people,  but  with  the  exception  of  a  few,, all  they
wanted  to  hear  about  was  Vietnam'."
—Wall  Street Journal, Dee. 27
L F. Stone's  Weekly
.  XIV, NO.  1
JANUARY  10, 1966
•o«       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
16  CENTS
What  Johnson's  Herald  Angels Sing
The  painful  fact  which  emerges  from  a  close  study  of  re-
actions  at  home  and  abroad  to  the  Johnson  peace  offensive  is
that  no   one  really  believes   in   its-  sincerity.    At   home   the
hawks  see  it  as  a  clever  maneuver  to  disarm  the  peace  move-
ment.    Abroad  it  is  generally   regarded   as  the  prelude  to  a
wider  war.  The  Johnson  Administration had  a  simple  way to
correct  this  impression.    A  declaration  that  it  was  prepared  to
accept  the  National  Liberation  Front  as  one  of  the  parties  to
a  negotiation  would  have  indicated  that  the  U.S. was  serious
in  its  search  for  peace.    Even  a  European  paper  as  far  right
as  Belgium's  Catholic-conservative  Libre  Belgique  put  its  fin-
ger  on  the  continued  unwillingness  to  deal  with  the  NLF  as
"the   weak  point  of  the  American  position."      (Washington
Star,  Jan. 4).    This  does  not  require  acceptance  of  the  NLF
as  sole   representative  of   the   South  Vietnamese;  the   Saigon
government  and  the  neutralist  Buddhists   are  also  entitled   (on
the  Laotian  model)   to  a  place.    But  to  negotiate  the  settle-
ment of  any war, one must  deal with the  enemy one  is fighting.
The  Same  Promises  We  Broke  Before
The  President,  in  one  of  the  14  points  being  circulated  by
the  State  Department  at  home  and  abroad,  is quoted  as saying
cryptically  that  if  North  Vietnam  stopped  its  "aggression,"  the
"Viet  Cong  would   not  have  difficulty   being  represented." *
But  if  this  is  true,  why  not  say  openly  and  unambiguously
that  we  will  negotiate  with  them?    Instead  Secretary  Rusk  in
his  December  30  interview  with  Canadian  Broadcasting Com-
pany  asked  the  Viet   Cong  to  "lay down  their  arms,   accept
amnesty,  engage  in  free  elections."    They  did  lay  down  their
arms   in   1954,  they   were   guaranteed   an   amnesty   in   the
Geneva   agreement.     Despite  this,  many  were  executed   and
others  thrown  into  concentration  camps.    The  promised  elec-
tions  were  never  held.    How  often  can  you  sell  the  Brooklyn
Bridge  to  the  very  same  sucker?   The  fact  is  that  the  Admin-
istration  has  indicated  here  and  in  Saigon  that  it  does  not  in-
tend  to  agree  to  any  settlement  which  would  give  the  NLF  or
the  Viet  Cong  any  voice  in  the  future  government   of   South
Vietnam.   That  would,  by the -Administration's  definition, still
leave  South  Vietnam  open  to  "subversion"  or  "indirect  aggres-
Quite  An  Admission
Saigon,  Dec. 31  (AP)—What  would  peace  now  mean
in  Vietnam?  .  .  .  .U.S.  and  Vietnamese  officials  alike
are  considering these  questions.  .  .  .  Even  the  start  of
peace  talks could undermine  or  destroy  the  U.S.  backed
government  in  Saigon.  .  .  .  Premier  Nguyen  Cao Ky
is  known  to  oppose  strongly  any  negotiations  at  .this
time.   He  said  recently  that  he  wanted  the  U.S. to  in-
vade  North  Vietnam  and Cambodia in  order  to  press  the
war  even  more  vigorously.  . .. The Vietnam war essen-
tially  is  a  political  struggle  for  the  allegiance  of peo-
ple.  ...  As  Saigon  authorities  see it,  a  cease-fire  would
favor   the  Communists.    Doubt  is  expressed   that   the
present    government—a    military    dictatorship—could
last  long  in  an  atmosphere  of  peace.    Yet  no  one  on
the   horizon  favorable  to   U.S.  interests   enjoys   any
measure  of  public  support.
—Washington  Post,  Jan. 1,  this  dispatch   concluded
that  "many  in  the  South"   who  are  "neither  anti  nor
pro-Communist  admire  and  respect  Ho  Chi  Minh."
* Though  all  Goldberg  would  say  at  a  UN  press  conference
Jan.  5  as  we  go  to  press  is  that  the  Viet   Cong  "point  of
view"  would  be  represented  at  the  conference  table.
1  *
sion."    But  "unconditional  discussions"  hedged  by  the  condi-
tion  that  we  will  not  deal  directly with  those  we  are  actually
fighting  nor  make  any  concession  to  them  is  tantamount  to  a
demand  for  their  surrender.    This  is  why  the  peace  offensive
does  not  look  real  even  to  our  friends  and  allies.
One  of  the  countries  visited  by  the  emissaries  Mr.   Johnson
has  flown  out  dramatically  all  around  the  globe  was  Canada.
Last  April  its  Prime  Minister  Pearson  was  one  of  the  first
to  suggest  a  pause  in  the  bombardment  of  North  Vietnam  as
a  prelude  to  negotiations.    One  would  have  expected  him  to
be especially  pleased  by the  new  pause and  the  peace  offensive.
Ottawa  was impressed  neither  by the  visit of  McGeorge Bundy
to  Ottawa  nor  by  the  45-minute  telephone  conversation  be-
tween  President   and  Prime  Minister  in  which  it  culminated,
perhaps  because  Mr.  Bundy  had  not  been  persuasive  enough.
Le  Mamie's  Ottawa  correspondent  reported  (Jan. 1)  that  the
Canadian   government   afterward  "minimized  the   importance
of   the  surprise   visit"   and  saw  no  change   in  Washington's
policy.    That  dispatch  revealed  another  instance  of  the  way
in  which  our  top  officials  seem  more  anxious  to  foreclose  than
to  find  loopholes  for  negotiation.     Blair  Seaborn,  Canada's
representative   last  year  on  the  International  Control  Commis-
(Continued   on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10,1966
the  rebels  control  two-thirds  of  South  Vietnam  and  their
leadership   embraces  a   broad  cross-section  including   many
non-Communists.    They   cannot  be  expected   to  permit  Mos-
cow,  Peking,  Hanoi  or  anyone  else  to  do  their  negotiating
for   them.   Nor  can  they  be  expected   to  accept   any   settle-
ment  that  does  not  give  them  a  reasonable  opportunity    to
share  in  the  postwar  government—a  government  uhich  ulti-
mately  should  be  determined  by  the  Vietnamese people  in  an
honorably   supervised  election.    Refusing    to  negotiate  with
the  rebel  front   would  have  its   parallel  if   King   George    III
had  expressed   a  willingness  to  negotiate  with  France  while
refusing    to   talk   with   George   Washington   and   his   rebel
forces.
—Sen. Geo. McGovern  (D., S. Dak.) Jan. 5
(Continued  from  Page  One)
sion  and  one of  our  chief  intermediaries  in  talking  with  Hanoi
last  year,  took  part  in  the  talks  with  Mr.  Bundy.   One  of  the
things  we  wanted  him  to  find  out  for  us  was  whether   the
famous  Four   Points  were  actual   conditions   for   negotiations.
Last  June  Mr.  Seaborn  reported   that  he  could  obtain  no  pre-
cise  response.    Le  Monde's   dispatch   from  Ottawa   discloses
that  the  Canadian  diplomat  gathered  the  impression  "that  the
evasive  responses  of  Hanoi  indicated  the  desire  of  the  North
Vietnamese  leaders  to  sound  out  the  possibilities  of   compro-
mise  directly  with  American  representatives."    The  U.S.  chose
to  place  the  more  pessimistic   interpretation  on  Hanoi's   atti-
tude,  perhaps  because  as  Ambassador  Lodge  was  saying  about
that  time   (Meet   the  Press,  May  23)   negotiations   would   be
"disastrous"  and  Mr.  Johnson's  offer  of  "unconditional  discus-
sions"  at  Baltimore  a  few  weeks  earlier  was  only  intended  to
put  the  onus  on  the  other   side.
Two  "Signals"  We  Ignored
Though  Mr.  Rusk  claims  to  have  had  his  antenna  alert  for
months  to  any  possible  "signal"  from  the  other  side,  this  and
many  other  signals  for  diplomatic  exploration  and  negotiation
have  been   ignored.     In  the  wake  of  the  Seaborn   inquiries,
there  were  two  other  signals  from  Hanoi  last  year  which  the
State  Department   brushed  aside.    These  have  since  come  to
the  attention   of   a  group  of   newspapermen   here,   including
myself,  but  have  not  been  discussed  in  print.    The  first  signal
was  the  formal  response  given  by  Ho  Chi  Minh  in  Le  Monde
last  August  14  to  questions  put  him  by  the  noted  French  his-
torian  of  Vietnam, M.  Philippe  Devillers,  who  seemed  to com-
mute  last  year  between  Washington  and  Hanoi.    Last July, ac-
cording  to Le  Monde,  "certain  American sources"  had  decided
seriously  to  study  the  Four   Points.     The   questions   Ho  an-
swered  sounded  like  requests  by  Washington   at  elucidation.
Two  important  points  came  out  of  Ho's   answers.    One  was
that  he  was  not  insisting  on  immediate  reunification, but  was
prepared  to  accept  indefinitely  the  existence of  an  autonomous
South  Vietnam  if  neutral  and  if  it  maintained  "fraternal"  re-
lations  with  the  North.    The  other  was  that  Ho  was  not  de-
manding  immediate  U.S.  troop  withdrawal  and  was  prepared
to  negotiate   "the   conditions  and  guarantees"   of  U.S.   disen-
gagement  if  Washington  gave  "tangible  proof"  that  it  accept-
How  The  Viet  Cong  Saw  The  Truce
"Said  one  authoritative  Vietnamese,  'You  can't   ex-
pect  Asians  to  observe  their  opponent's  unilateral  de-
cision,  they  would  lose  face.    The  Viet  Cong's  own  12
hour  cease-fire  like  last  year's  was  to  allow  the  Catho-
lic  peasants   and  soldiers  to  attend  Christmas  mass  in
the  village  churches.   It  had nothing  to  do  with Ameri-
can   troops.     The   Americans  are   trying   to   impress
world   opinion  while  the   Viet   Cong's   propaganda   is
almost  entirely  aimed  at  a  psychological  effect  among
the  Vietnamese,  even  when  targets  are  American  in-
stallations.   The  Viet  Cong didn't  violate  the  American,
cease-fire,  they  just  ignored  it.'"
—Critchfield  from  Saigon,  Wash. Star, Dec. 27
ed  the  principles  embodied  in  the  Four  Points.
A  second  move  which  Hanoi  regarded  as  a  peaceful   signal
came   several   weeks  later.     Secretary   Rusk  had   said   several
times  that  the  U.S.  would  stop  bombing  the  North  if  it  would
make   some   comparable    "de-escalation"   such   as   withdraw-
ing  the  325th  Division  from  South  Vietnam.    On   September
21,  Richard  Dudman  in  the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch  and  Ber-
nard  Gwertzman  in  the  Washington  Star disclosed  on  the  basis
of   a  briefing  that  U.S.   intelligence   reported   there  had   been
no  contact  in  recent  weeks with  the  325th  Division.  The  brief-
ing—significantly—was  not   in  the  State  Department,   which
at  once  knocked  down  these  stories.  The  Department's  spokes-
man,  Robert  J.  McCloskey  admitted  that  the  325th  had  not
been   "engaged   in   activities,"   according  to   the   Washington
Star  Sept.  24,  but  said  they  were  "believed  to  be  still  there."   *
Just  what  made  the  Department   believe  they  were  still  there
was  not  explained;  perhaps  Mr.  Rusk's  antenna  detected  them
rustling  in  the  jungle  foliage.    All  this  was  very  confusing  at
the  time,  and  the  Department   was  given  the  benefit  of   the
doubt;  now  it  appears  on  reliable  authority that  the  325th  was
withdrawn   at   the   time.     Washington's    failure   to   keep   its
promise  and  reciprocate  by  calling  off  the  bombing  was  re-
garded  as  proof   of  insincerity by  Hanoi.                                                           «i
This  record,  like Washington's  treatment  of  the  Four  Points,
can  hardly  create  confidence.   These  Four  Points,  Ho  said  in
his  cable  to  Pope  Paul  are  merely  a  restatement  of  the   1954
Geneva  pact.    Washington   disagrees  only  on  Point  3. Though
Despite   Those   Sour   Headlines,  There  Was  A  Christinas  Truce  in Vietnam
Lai   Khe,  South  Vietnam—"It  was  so  quiet  last   night  I
couldn't  sleep  for  the  silence."    Capt.  Jay  Franz  of  Denver,
Colo.,  an  engineering  officer  with  the  1st  Infantry  Division,
was  describing the  eerie  silence  that  has  descended  on Viet-
nam's   battlefront   since   the   30-hour   Christmas cease-fire
went  into  effect  at  6  p.m.  Friday.   This  reporter  flew  in  a
helicopter  over the  1st  Division's  entire perimeter north and
west   of   Saigon   in   the   lethal   rubber   plantation  country,
scene  of  several  recent  bitter battles,  and  experienced some
of   the  strange  silence   that  Franz  spoke  of.    No  convoys
moved  along  the  dusty  roads,  where  in  past  weeks  several
have  been  ambushed.   No  fighters  or  bombers  screamed  off
from  the  big  air  bases  at  Tan  Son  Nhut  and  Bien  Hoa.
The  Iron  Triangle,  a  jungle  area  north  of  Saigon  where
several   regiments   of   Viet   Cong   reportedly   are   dug   in,
stretched  green  and serene  under  a  merciless  Christmas  sun
that  kept  the  temperature in  the  high  90s.    Officers  of   the
3rd  Brigade  sat   down  to   Christmas  dinner   in  the   lovely
main  house  of  an  abandoned rubber plantation without  the
percussive  accompaniment of   the  big  175s  and  105  howit-
zers  that  usually  bang  away  on  the  edge  of  the  airstrip.
"For  once,"  said  Maj.  John  Efferson  of  Centralia,  111.,  "the
windows  aren't  rattling  and  the  ceiling  plaster  isn't  falling
into  the  soup."         —AP  in  the  Washington  Star,  Dec. 25
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10,1966
the  press  has  been  encouraged  to  report  Point  3  as  handing
over  South  Vietnam  to  the  Viet  Cong,  all  it  says  is  that   "the
internal  affairs  of  South  Vietnam  must  be  settled  by  the  South
Vietnamese  people  themselves, in  accordance  with  the  program
of  the  NLF  without  any foreign  interference."    In  the  memo-
randum  prepared  for  Vice  President  Humphrey's  trip  abroad
it  is  said  that  this  "would  require  the  imposition  of  the  pro-
gram  of  the  liberation front  upon  South  Vietnam, whether  the
South  Vietnamese wanted  it  or  not."    This   reflects  the  State
Department's  genius  for  distortion.    The  NLF  program   calls
for  election  of  "a  new  National  Assembly  through  universal
suffrage"  and  for  the  establishment  of  free  press,  opinion  and
assembly.    After   12  years  of  financing  dictatorship  in  South
Vietnam,  the  U.S.  government does  not  enhance  its  reputation
by trying to  make  it  appear  that  the  NLF  program  is  somehow
undemocratic.    The  NLF   program   is  so  broad  and  general
in   its  principles  of   democracy,  land   reform,   neutrality   and
amnesty  as to  allow  ample room  for  honorable negotiation  and
guarantees   of   a   free   regime   if   we   were   looking   for   real
negotiation.
Preparing   For  Wider  War
The  peace  offensive  seems  to  be  a  pantomime  with  wholly
different  purposes.    The  bill  for  the  Vietnamese war  is  grow-
ing  by  huge  increments.   Last  May  Mr.  Johnson  had  to  ask
Congress  for  a  supplementary appropriation  of  $700,000,000;
in  July  he  went  back  for  an  extra  $1.7  billion.   Now  it  is dis-
closed  that  Mr.  Johnson  must  ask  for  another  $12  to  $13  bil-
lion  more  for  the  current  fiscal  year  to  meet  the  rising  costs
of   the  war.    If  that  is  how  much  the  war  is  costing  us  in
South  Vietnam, it will  cost  many  times more when  extended—
as  we  seem  on  the  verge  of  doing—to  Laos,  Cambodia  and
Thailand,  not  to  speak  of  China.    It  was  a  political  necessity
to  seem  at  least  to  make every  effort  for  peace  before  present-
ing  so  monstrous  a  bill  to  Congress.    It's  not  just  the  peace
movement,  it's  the  fiscal  conservatives who  are  worrying  the
Administration.    This  little  war  is  adding  up  to  a  very  large
bill.
Abroad  the  peace  offensive  must  be  seen  against  the  back-
ground  of  the  reports  by  Rusk  and  McNamara  to  NATO  in
December.    The  accounts  filtering  out  of  that  meeting  in  Paris
Withholding  the  Truth  on  Weapon  Losses
In  our  reply  to  the  State  Department's  White  Paper
last  March 8, we  pointed  out  that  the  government's own
figures   indicated  only  about   2
l
/z%   of  the  Viet  Gong's
weapons  were  of  Soviet  bloc  origin.    Now  in  checking
at  the  Pentagon  on  the  year-end  tally  of  weapons  losses
in  1965,  we  learn  that  information  on  the  origin  of  cap-
tured  weapons  has  been  classified.    A  press  officer  im-
plied  that  most  of  the  guns  were  Chinese  imitations  of
Russian  models.    If  this  were  true  it  would  support  the
case  for  stronger  action  against  China.    We  assume  the
Viet  Cong  have  been  getting  more  outside  aid  but  we
suspect   the   figures   have  been   classified   because   they
would  show  that  the  number  of  Chinese  and  other   Sov-
iet  bloc  weapons  are  still  smaller  than  those  the   guer-
rillas  get  from  our  side.   The  weapons  loss  figures  for
last  year  (see   UPI  tally,  Washington  Post  Jan.  2)  also
omit  weapons  losses  by  U.S.  troops;  this,  too,  has  been
classified.     The   figures   given   for   South    Vietnamese
Army  weapon losses  are  hard  to believe.   The  Pentagon
tally  for  1964  showed  4900  weapons  captured  from  the
guerrillas  and  13,700  lost  to  them;  a  surplus   in  their
favor  of  8,800.    This  year's  tally  shows  14,690  captured
from  them  and 15,972 lost  to  them,  or a  surplus  in  their
favor  of  only  1,282.    Considering  the  increase  in  fight-
ing,  the  sharp  rise  in  weapons  captured  from  the  guer-
rillas  is  credible,  but  the  slight  rise  in  weapons  lost  to
them  is  not.    A  footnote  to  the  table  says  cryptically,
"U.S.   authorities   refused   to  list  the  exact  number  of
weapons  lost."   We  have  no  trouble  at  all  in  believing
that  the  figures  are  not  exact.
made  them  sound  like  the  apocalyptic Air  Force  bomber  Gen-
erals,  ready to  take  on  China.   As Le  Monde  said  Dec.  18  the
way  they  talked  of   the  Chinese  peril  indicated  Washington
had  little  illusion about  the  possibility of  a peaceful settlement
and  was  embarking  on  a  war  of  great  dimensions  "without
knowing  where  escalation  would  stop."    Our    surmise,  look-
ing  at  Johnson's  various  jet-age  angels,   is  that   Humphrey's
mission  was  to  drum  up  Asian  troops;   Harriman's  to  warn
the   East   European   Communists   to   keep   hands   off;  Mc-
Namara's  and  Rusk's  to  shake  our  NATO  allies  out  of  their
indifference  to  our  obsession  with  China,  and  Goldberg's  to
try  and  persuade  the  Pope  of  the  purity  of  our  intentions as
we  move  giddily  along  the  brink.
One  Place  Where  Non-Whites  Get  More  Than  Their  Share:  The  Draft  for  Vietnam
The  New  York  Times  has  scooped  us.    For  some  time  we
have  noticed  what   seemed   an  unusually  large   number  of
Negro  soldiers  in  pictures  from  the  Vietnamese   battlefields
and  in  the  obituary   page  notices  of  soldiers  killed  in  the
war.    Our  inquiries  at  the  Pentagon  produced  only  a  run-
around.    All  we  could  get  were  overall    figures.    One  was
that  Negroes   were  about  8%  of  the   fighting   men  in  Viet-
nam;  no  breakdown  could  be  obtained  as  between  the  Navy
and   the   Air   Force,   which  prefer  whites,   and  the   Army,
which  depends  on  the  draft.    Similarly,  on  the  ratio  of  Ne-
gro  casualties   we  could  get  only  an  over-all  figure  of   1%.
"If  it  is  true,"  we  asked   one  press  officer,   "that   most   Ne-
groes  serve  in  the  Army,  where  casualties  are  higher,  how
is  it  that  the  percentage  of  Negro  casualties  is  less  than  the
average  of  Negroes  in  the  armed services?"  "I  don't  know,"
was  the  huffy  reply,  "and  frankly  I'm  not  interested."
We  seemed  to  have  reached  a  dead  end.    Then  on January
3  the  New  York  Times  came  up  with  a  basic   figure.   It  re-
vealed  that  in  the  12  months  ended  last  June,  16.3%  of  the
men drafted  into  the  Army  were  non-white,  though  the  per-
centage   of   non-whites   in   the   general   population   is   only
11%.  The  figures  were  elicited  in  an  interview  which  seemed
designed  to  give  publicity  to  the  fact  that  the  Pentagon  now
has  an  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  for  Civil  Rights  and
Industrial  Relations,  Jack  Moscowitz.  The  reason  non-whites
are  drafted  more  than  whites  is  that  more  white  boys  have
the  money  to  qualify for  deferment  by  staying  on  in  gradu-
ate  schools.   The  story  did not  provide  casualty  figures,  but
it  did  disclose  that  only  3.5%  of  the  Negroes  in  the  Army,
1.5%  in  the  Air  Force  and  0.3%  in  the  Navy  were  officers.
To  a  large  part  of  the  world  the  Vietnamese  war  is  the
last  attempt  of  a  white  nation  to  maintain  a  dominant  role
in  East  Asia,  the  last  stand  of  white  colonialism.     The  es-
sence  of  colonialism  is  the  humiliation of  a  non-white  people
so  that  its  labor  power  can  be  utilized  cheaply  by  a  domi-
nant  white  people.    That  also  describes  the  position  in  our
society   of   most   non-whites,   whether   Negroes,   Mexicans,
Puerto  Ricans  or  American  Indians.    Non-whites    generally
get  less  pay  and  less  employment.   They  get  more  only  of
the  dirty  work  of  our  society,  and  it  now  appears  that  they
are  also  getting  more  than  their  proportionate   share  of  the
sacrifice  in  the  Vietnamese  war.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  10,1966
Journalist  Says  Even  Genocidal  Tactics  Won't  Give  U.S.  Victory in Vietnam
Fernand   Gigon,  a  Swiss   journalist,  who  has   been  in
Indochina  no  less  than  18  times,  author  of  a  book  "China
Faces  Failure"   highly   critical  of   the  Communist   regime,
has  just  published  in  Paris  a  new  book  on  Vietnam,  "Les
Americains  face  au  Vietcong"  based  on  a  visit   last  sum-
mer,  which  stigmatizes   the  American   conduct  of  the  war
as  barbarous.   Here,  from  an  interview  in  the  Dec. 1  issue
of   Le  Nouvel  Observateur  and  in  a  box  from   the  book  it-
self   we  present   a  glimpse   of   his  conclusions  and  revela-
tions :
Q.  In   the  months  to   come,   what  would   be  the  "ideal"
strategy  for  the  Americans?
A.  The  strategy  of  the  scorched  earth.    Regroup  the  popu-
lation  termed   democratic  in  the  governmental   zones  and  re-
duce  life  everywhere  else  to  zero.    In  other  words,  obtain  vic-
tory  on  the  ground   by  genocide.    The   military   in   Saigon
envisage   this   with   perfect   coolness.     In   Washington,  they
hesitate;   such  a  policy  would   make  the  Americans  lose  the
"good  will"  on  which  they  set  such  store,   already   seriously
damaged,  and  make  the  champions  of  liberty  appear  the  equal
of  the  Nazis.  .  .  .
Anyhow,  if  the  policy  of  the  scorched  earth  were  applied,
the  Vietcong  would  disappear  only  to  reappear   later,  in  cells
of   three  or  four  men,  and   resume  their   harrassments,   am-
bushes,  etc.    One  cannot  kill  an  idea  with  bombs,   the  Viet-
cong  declare  themselves  ready  to  win  the  war  12  or  15  years
hence:  at  that  time  they  could  put  into  application   the  four
points  of  General  Giap  to  prepare  a general  insurrection.    But
it  is  absolutely  inconceivable  that  a  Western   army  could   re-
main  in  Asia  for  such  a  space  of  time.
Q.  Have  you  been  able  to  establish  whether  the   Vietcong
do  live  "among  the  people  like  a  fish  in  water?"
A.  Yes.    A  French  priest  told  me  the  following  story.    At
80  kilometers  from  Saigon,  in  a  camp  occupied  and  defended
by  Americans,  the  Vietcong  asked  him   (and  he  agreed   and
did)   to  celebrate  a  midnight  mass  at   10  p.m.   in  the  same
church  where  two  hours  later,  he  was  going  to  celebrate  the
rite  for  the governmental  forces.  . .  . Everywhere the  Vietcong
have   contacts  with   the   population,  even   inside   entrenched
camps.   .  .  .  And   each  month,  eight  to  ten  thousand   South
.Vietnamese  soldiers join  the  Communist camp.
Some   U.S.    Pilots  Rebel  at   Genocide
"In the  army  itself,  officer  pilots,  begin  to  desert  their
mission  for  moral  reasons.    They  thought  they  were  to
make  war, that  is  to  drown  troops with napalm and fire,
risking  flak  in  accordance  with  a  conventional  scheme
of  attack  and  counter-strike  into  which  no  moral  con-
siderations  entered.    But  they  found  themselves  being
'used  to  burn  villages,  to  set  rice  harvests  afire,  to  de-
stroy  forests  and  to  reduce  to  ashes  everything  living,
human   or   animal,   in   ever   greater   areas.     There   is
something  vile  in  the  gratuitonsness  of  attacks  by  the
Strategic  Air  Command  which orders  up  to  310  raids  in
a  single  day  or  sends  50  B-52s  at  a  time  against  de-
fenseless  objectives.   This  clay  pigeon  shoot,  inhuman,
demented,  would  perhaps  have  some  justification  if   it
hastened   the  end  of   the  conflict.    But  we're  nowhere
near  in  sight.   Every  now  and then  a  conscience awak-
ens.    'It  is  no  longer  war,'  officers  with  qualms of  con-
science  say.  It  is  genocide.'   Mounting  moral  confusion
and  religious  conviction  often  lead  them  to  the  thresh-
hold  of  revolt;  they  ask  to  be  relieved.  .  .  .
"The  General  Staff  makes  these  conscientious  object-
ors  sign  a  new  declaration  in  which  the  pilots  promise
on  their  return  to  the  United  States  to  reveal  neither
the  reasons  for  their  desertion  nor  the  scenes  to  which
they  have  been  witness.    Without  publicity,  the   officer
is  for  the  time  being  reduced  in  rank  and  his  military
privileges  are  taken from  him.   He  returns  to  his  coun-
try  more solitary  than  if  in  a  desert.    Some  find  them-
selves  in  psychiatric  clinics."
—Fernand  Gigon:  Les  Americains   face   au  Vietcong
(Paris)   Flammarion,  1965, pps.  151-2.
Q.  The  solution  of  the  war,  can  it  then  be  found  only  in
negotiation ?
A.  That  is  plain.    I  am  no  Communist  and  I  am  Swiss,  so
I  always feel  above  the  battle.    But  for  me,  there  is  no  doubt:
This  war  cannot  be  won  by the  Americans.   They  make  a  big
mistake  in  refusing  to  recognize  the  political   reality  of   the
Vietcong.  .  .  . The final  step  of  escalation—I  am  deeply  con-
vinced  of  it—would  be world  war.  .  .  . The first  bomb  which
falls  on  China  would  unleash  the  intervention  of  Russia.  .  .  .
Sino-Soviet  differences  are  enormous,  of  course,  but  they  are
within  the  family  of  Marxism.
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send  A Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —  Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Name  ...................................
CfftAAt
City   ......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)  Name  .......................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
....Zone............State....................
1/10/66
a  gift  sub  to:
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.   D.  C.    Published  evep  Monday  etcept  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington,  D.C.    An  independent   weekly  Published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the  U.S.:   S6   in   Canada:    *10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED