I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966nov21.pdf

============================================================

And  Now An  Anti-Missile  Gap? Pps.  2-3
We  Certainly Hope  These  Grave  Fears  Are Well-Founded
"The   peace party  always wins.   I  know  my  own party.   If      can  keep them  from  trying  to  outbid the  Democrats  for  the
the  war  is  still  going  on  in  '68,  there  is  no  power  on  earth     peace vote."     —Nixon's  "warning"  in New  York  Nov.  11.
L K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  37
November  21,  1966
«>'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.15  CENTS
Will  Defeat  Sober  Up  Rock  Johnson?
Goldwaterism  has  now  lost  two  elections—for  the  Repub-
licans  in  1964  and  the  Democrats  in  1966.    This  is  a  sweep-
ing   over-simplification.    But  the   element  of   truth   in   it  is
essential  if  the  Republicans are  not  to  win  in  1968.    It  is  not
easy  to  sum  up  the  last  election.    In  one  way  it  was lifeless;
it  could  make  one  despair  to  see  a  free  country  hold  an  elec-
tion  in  which  the  main  issues  were  hardly  mentioned.    How
does  one  sum  up  results  so  diverse  that  Goldwater's  heir  ap-
parent  could  win  the  Governorship  in  California and  his  lead-
ing  Republican opponent  be  reelected  Governor  of  New  York,
in  which  racially  moderate  Republicans won  over  Democrats
in   Arkansas  and   Tennessee  while  both  parties  competed  in
racism  in  Alabama  and  Georgia,  and  the  Auto  Worker's  ma-
chine  went  down  to  defeat  in  Michigan?    In   which  white
backlash   unseated  Douglas   in  Illinois   but  a  Negro  Senator
was  elected  in  Massachusetts?     After   a  compaign  in  which
Eastland   and   Hale   Boggs  were  attacked  by  Republicans  in
Mississippi  and  Louisiana  as  Leftists  while  the  GOP's  fore-
most  dove  won  a  Senate seat  from  Oregon  in  the  only  contest
where  Vietnam  was  the  issue?    If  ever  there  was  a  political
crazy  quilt,  this  is  it.
If  There  Were  No  War
The  issue  few  mentioned,  on  which  most  people  are  con-
fused,   was   nevertheless   crucial.     Almost   everything   which
ailed   the  Democratic  party  in   this   election   and   caused   its
shattering   defeat,  can  be  traced  back  to  the  war,-  Johnson's
war.     If  Johnson  had  not  done  what Goldwater  advocated  and
stepped  up  the  whole  scale  of  the  conflict  by  launching  an  air
war  against  the  North  and  a major  invasion  by American  land
forces  in  Asia,  there  would  have  been  no  inflation, no  disrup-
tion  of  the  home  building  market,  no  loss  of  business  confi-
dence  so  great  that  the   stock  market  plummeted   while  the
price  level  rose.    There  would  have  been  no  split  in  Demo-
cratic  ranks,  no  alienation  of  the  peace-minded  like that  which
helped  swamp  Brown  in  California  and  has  brought  Johnson
the  hatred  of  many who  would  otherwise  applaud  his  domes-
tic  program.    There  would  be  few  doves  and  there  would  be
few  hawks  if  the  war  were  still  a  distant  conflict   simmering
away  in  Southeast  Asia.   It  is Johnson's  war  which  was  John-
son's   undoing.
This  might  be  dismissed  as  largely  the  wishful  thinking  of
one  wljo  is  deeply  opposed  to  the  war  if  it  were  not  the  opin-
ion  of   others   as  deeply   committed   to  it.    Nixon,  who  has
wanted   large-scale   American  intervention   in  Vietnam   since
1954,  the  man  who  emerged  from  the  campaign  with  the  best
A  Forecast  to  Remember Now
"Shortening  the  war  to  the  order  of  five  years  could
require  anywhere from  half  a  million  to  2  million  U.S.
troops  with  casualties  and  treasure  of  like  magnitude.
.  .  .  The  Vietnamese  could  lose   more  than  a  million
killed.  .  .  . The risk  of  Chinese entry into the  war could
increase  sharply  if  the  Communists  were  faced ... by
a  truly  massive U.S.  presence there. ...  If  we  decided
that  we  must  limit  our  commitment  in  Vietnam  even
at  the price of  our objectives ... we  would  have to  face
the  strong  possibility that,  as  happened at  the  time  of
Korea,  a  change  in  policy  in  Vietnam  would  have  to  be
brought   about   by  a  change  of   Administration  in  the
United  States."
—"The  Impossible   Choices  in  Vietnam",    declassified
version   of   a  study   by  S.  J.  Deitchman,  Institute    -for
Defense   Analyses,  a  Pentagon  "think  factory",   in  the
Washington   Post  May   22.   This  "computerized"   mili~
tary   forecast,   the  most  comprehensive  available,  esti-
mated  that  at  the  then  level of  operations  (235,000  J7-S.
troops)  the  war  "would  last"  20  to 30 years.   It  did  not
say  which  side,  if   either,  would  win.
record  for  sizing  up  its cross-currents in  advance,  was  express-
ing  his  fears  not  his  hopes  when  he  said  (see  box  above)  that
if  the  war  is  still  going  on  in   1968   "there  is  no  power   on
earth"  which  can  keep  his  own  party  "from  trying  to  outbid
the  Democrats  for  the  peace  vote."    It  was not  wishful  think-
ing  which  made  the  pro-war   U.S.  News   &  World   Report
report  (Nov.   14)   "Politicians  in  both  parties  are  saying  Mr.
Johnson  will  need  to  get  the  war  ended  by  or  before  mid-
1968,   or  he'll  have  a  hard  time  getting  elected."    Even  the
hawks  are unhawklike in  that  they have  no  enthusiasm for  the
war;  they  want  it  over  as  quickly  as  possible.    This  is  very
different  from  the  jingoism  of  the  British  in  the   comparable
Boer  war  or  the  ethnocentric  militarism  of  the  Germans.     It
is  the  impatience  of  a  people  who  regard  war  as  an  unfortu-
nate  interruption   of  their  main  business   which   is  business.
If  Johnson   does  not  heed  this  message,  the  Republicans  will.
Many  of  us will  see a Republican victory  again—as  in  1952_
the  only way to  end  an  Asian war.   The  price  will  be the  end
of  that  progress  on  the  home  front  which  began  under   Ken-
nedy  and  took  on  real  momentum  under  Johnson   before  he
made  his  error  in  February,  1965,   in  the  skies  over  North
Vietnam.     Even  another   interlude  of   social  stagnation   and
lackluster  leadership  would  not  be  too  high  a price  to  pay  for
peace  if  Johnson  does  not  change  course.
I 4
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  SI,  1866
Is  the  Military-Industrial  Complex  Launching  An  Anti-Missile  Gap
It  is  not  easy  to  determine  whether   Secretary   McNamara's
announcement   that   the   Soviet   Union  is  deploying   an  anti-
ballistic  missile  system   is  designed   to   defend   us  from   on-
slaught  by  the  Russians,  or  to  shield  Johnson  and  McNamara
from  an  anti-ballistic  missile  "gap"   campaign  by  the  Repub-
licans  and  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  when  Congress  reconvenes.
Those  correspondents who  cover  the  Pentagon  seem  to  think
it's  the  latter.    Wm.  Beecher  (New   York   Times,  Nov.  it)
interpreted   the  McNamara   statement   as  "an  Administration
effort   to   stave  off   potentially   overwhelming   Congressional
pressure"  for  a  U.S.  anti-missile  system  by  announcing   that
we  would  equip  our  nuclear  submarine  fleet  with  a  new  mis-
sile,  Poseidon,  far  more  powerful  than  the  Polaris,  and  easily
able  to  overwhelm  any anti-missile  defenses  the  Russians  could
build.  Similarly  Murray  Marder  (Washington  Post,  Nov.   13)
said   "McNamara   was  developing   insurance   against   charges
that  the  U.S.  is  falling  behind  in  the  missile  race."
Romney  Scents  An  Issue
Signs  of  the  coming  battle  were  evident  in  Romney's  ap-
pearance  on  Meet  the  Press  (Nov.  13).   Though  the  rubbery
Governor  was able  flexibly  to  turn  up  on  several  sides  of  every
question  put  to  him,  he  zeroed  in  on  this  one.    He  said  that
while  the  Democrats  in  the  I960  campaign  made  a  supposed
missile  gap  one  of  their  main  talking  points,  McNamara  has
"just  confronted  us with  a  problem  of  probably  equal  serious-
ness  in  indicating  that  Russia  now  has  an  anti-ballistic  missile
and  we  don't   have  one.   .  .  ."    He  added,   with  his  happy
capacity  for  not  realizing  quite  what  he  was  saying,  that   "per-
haps  we  have  a  gap  in  this  respect  now  as a  result  of  the  mis-
management  of  these  Democratic  administrations  that  is  com-
parable  to  the  missile gap  that  proved  to  be  a  myth."
If  the  anti-missile gap  is  comparable  to'the  missile  gap,  it
will  also  turn  out  to  be  a  myth, but  not  before  it  has  cost  the
country   billions,   as  did   the   missile  gap   and   before   it  the
bomber  gap.    There  is  reason  to  believe  the  anti-missile  gap
may   be   just  as  phoney.     The   headlines  generated   by  Mc-
Namara's  statement  has  given  the  public  the  impression  that
Soviet   cities   are   already  ringed   with   anti-missile   defenses.
Gen.  McConnell, the  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff,  chimed  in with
a  speech  in  Birmingham Nov.  11  in  which  he  said,  "A  major
technological  break-through,  such  as  development  of  an   effec-
tive  anti-missile  defense,  could  conceivably induce  an  aggres-
sor  to  wage nuclear war  in  the  conviction that  he  could  do  so
with  virtual  impunity."    We   can  already  see  our  retaliatory
missiles  "hung  up"  harmlessly in  the  skies over the  Soviet Un-
Uncle  Sam, The  Guerrilla's Friend
"When  allied  troops  overrun  an  encampment  of   the
Viet  Cong  or the  PAVN  (People's  Army of  North  Viet-
nam)  they  usually  find  rice,  sometimes  in  AID  sacks,
medicine  with  American  brand  names  and  tools.  .  .  .
At  Ba  Hao,  50  miles  from  Saigon,  the  U.S.  196th Light
Infantry  Brigade  recently  captured  a  Viet  Cong  camp
and  uncovered  .  .  .  more  than  a  million  and a quarter
pounds  of  AID  rice,  440  gallons  of  gasoline,  600  gallons
of   cooking  oil,   88  shovels,   750  pounds  of   rice.     The
bags  of  rice,  enough  to  feed  a  Viet  Cong  division  for
two   months,   still   bore   the   names   of   the  American
exporters."
—First  of  six  AP   articles  from   Saigon   on  the  cor-
ruption  there  in  the  Washington  Sunday  Star  Nov.  IS.
"Mostly   circumstantial  evidence  is  cited  to  support
the  theory  that  Communist   China  and  North  Vietnam
are  involved  directly  in  the  terrorism   [in  Thailand].
Captured  weapons  are  mainly  American  made."
—AP  from   Thailand  in  Washington   Star  Nov.  9.
Maybe  the  fastest  way  to  wipe  out  guerrilla  activity
would  be  to  shut  off  U.S.   aid.
ion,  in  true  Buck  Rogers   fashion,  while  the  Russians  attack
us  "with  virtual  impunity."     When  the  campaign  warms  up,
it  will  foster  this  popular  notion  of  an  anti-missile  as  a  kind
of  gadget  that  can  turn  off  an  incoming  missile  much  as  those
new   TV   switches   enable   one   to   shut   off  Open   Mind    for
Wagon  Train  without  having  to  walk  across  the  room  to  the
idiot   box.
Not  only  are  no  such  miraculous  devices in  sight  but  there
is  no  evidence  that  we  have  actually  detected  any  of  the  exist-
ing  kinds  of  inadequate  anti-missiles around  Soviet  cities.  All
we  have  actually  observed   (see  box  below)   is that  certain  sites
have  been  cleared   and  structures  prepared   outside  some  un-
named  Russian  cities.  This  might  mean  that  the  Russians  were
getting  ready  to  deploy   missiles.    Reports  that  the  Russians
were   installing  anti-missiles   around   their   cities   have   been
cropping  up  in  print  for  at  least  three  and  a  half  years,  but
none  have  yet  been  detected  by  the  multitude  of  satellites  we
have  photographing   the  Soviet  Union  night  and   day.    Un-
confirmed  "leaks"  of  this kind  from  Air  Force  intelligence  set
off  the  bomber  gap  and  later  the  missile  gap  hysterias.
The  Washington   Star  seems  to  have  published  the  first  of
these anti-missile gap  reports  back  in  March,  1963.    Its  Penta-
gon  correspondent,  Richard  Fryklund,  noted   (Nov.   11)  that
while  Khruschev  boasted  that  the  Russians had  a  rocket  which
McNamara   Provides  Another   Example  of  What  Creates  The  Credibility  Gap
Q.  Mr.  Secretary  did  you  say  that  the  Soviets  were  de-
ploying  an  anti-ballistic  missile  system?
McNamara:  Yes,  I  believe there  is  considerable  evidence
that  they  are.
Q.  Is   it   an   effective   system,   sir?
McNamara:   I  think   you   would   have  to  ask  them.
—At  the LBJ  ranch  (transcript   in  Wash.  Post  Nov.  11).
"Pentagon   officials   stressed  that  Russia  does  not  have  a
lot  of  missiles  sitting  on  launchers  ready  to  down  any  in-
coming  missiles.    The  evidence instead  shows  the  kind  of
activity   which   precedes   widespread  deployment,  such   as
clearing  sites  or  building  structures.   This  is  the  third  time
in  about  five  years  Russia  has  shown  signs  of  deploying  an
ABM  system  around  its  cities.   The  two  earlier  efforts  were
abandoned,  presumably because  of  technical  difficulties.    But
McNamara's  announcement indicates  he  believes  Russia  is
going  all  the   way  into  deployment  this   time.    However,
Pentagon  officials  caution that  deployment of  an  ABM  sys-
tem,  either  by  the  U.S.  or  Russia,  is  no  overnight  process."
—Geo. C. Wilson  in  Washington  Post, Nov.  12.
"Seven  months ago  U.S.  officials  reported  that  Russia  had
started  to  build  anti-missile  facilities  but  quit—apparently
because  of  construction  difficulties.
1
'
—AP  in  the Baltimore  Sun, Nov. 12.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F; Stone's  Weekly,  November  21, 1966
.  . . Like the  Phoney  Bomber and Missile  Gaps  So Profitable to It In  The Past?
could  "hFt  a fly-" in  the  sky,  the  Kremlin's  military  seem  to
have  more  sober  views.    "There  are  many  signs,"  Fryklund
•wrote,  "that   Soviet   leaders   themselves   are   not   sure   such  a
system  is worth  the  money."    He  pointed  out  that  "there  have
been "considerable  delays  in  building  the  rudimentary  ABM
systejHs   now   believed   to   be   installed   around   Moscow   and
Leningrad."    (Our  italics.)    What  if  the  Russians are  doing
what  McNamara  himself   has  suggested,  building   some  anti-
missiles  to  cope  with  any  danger  from  China  while recogniz-
ing  that  it  is  useless  to  deploy  even  a  far  more  complex  sys-
tem   against   the  kind   of   sophisticated   missiles  we   and   the
Russians  possess?
Anti  Anti-Missile  Devices
"The  idea  of  the  anti-missile was that  by swiftly  determining
.an   incoming  missile's  trajectory   we  could   send  up   an  anti-
missile  to  hit  and  destroy  it  in  outer  space.  So both  sides  have
been  developing  missiles  that  can  change  their  trajectory,  con-
fuse  the  defenses  with  a  shower   of  decoys  and  blackout   the
radars  and  computers  on  which  the  fantastically complex  anti-
missile  gaxlgetry  depends.    Apparently  we  already  have  such
tricky  warheads  in  our  own  arsenal,  penetration  devices  the
Defense  Department   insists  "absolutely  guarantee  [as  George
C.  Wilson  wrote  in  the  Washington  Post  Nov.  12]  that  U.S.
ICBMS  like  Poseidon   and  Minutemen  can  get  through   any
defense."    If  this  is  true,  why  stir  up  panic  about  Soviet  anti-
missile  defenses  which  may  or  may  not  be  in  process  of  con-
struction ?
"Today,"  the   Irish   delegate   Frank   Aiken  told   the   First
Committee  during  its  debates  on  non-proliferation  at  the  UN
Nov.   3,  "we  all  live  in  the  shadow   of   a  strategic   balance
founded   upon   the  present   equilibrium   between   the   leading
nuclear   powers   and   their   alliances.    This  equilibrium   rests
not  only  on  the  extent  of  their  stockpiles  but  on  the  existing
standard   of   accuracy  and   penetration   of   their  delivery  sys-
tems."     He   quoted   U  Thant's   warning  that   "a   unilateral
breakthrough   by  one  of   these  Powers  in  either  offensive   or
defensive  nuclear  weapon  capability"  could   "lead  at  once  to
a  new  and  greatly  accelerated  nuclear  arms  race."
We  stand  on  the  threshold   of  just  such  a  race.    The  de-
ployment  of  Poseidon  will  stimulate  a  similar  stepup  in  offen-
sive  power  on  the  other  side.  If  we  begin  to  build  the  Nike-X
Missiles  Next  in Vietnam?
"The  heavy  losses  of   U.S.   jet   aircraft   over   North
Vietnam  have  caused  the  Pentagon  to  examine  the  use
of  ballistic  missiles,  and  even  battleships,  to  shell  tar-
gets  in  North Vietnam.   The  main  advantage  would  be
that   the   anti-aircraft  guns   in  North  Vietnam  would
offer   no   defense   against   shells   or  ballistic   missiles.
The  high  level  of  anti-aircraft  fire  has  already  brought
down  more  than  400  American jet  aircraft  over  North
Vietnam.   The  U.S.  Navy  is  keen  to  reactivate  cruisers
with  8-inch  guns  to  fire  on  North  Vietnam.   The  eco-
nomics  of  bringing  one  of  the  four  battleships  out  of
mothballs  has  also  been  studied.  .  .  .
The  U.S.  Army  also  believes  that  it  could  carry  on
with   the  bombardment  of   North  Vietnamese  targets
with  ballistic  missiles  fired  from  South  Vietnam.   The
arguments  in  favor  of   missiles   have  been  reinforced
by  the  losses  of  aircraft, which must have cost  the  U.S.
at  least  £300m.  ($840,000,000)  since  the  bombing  began
last  year.
—Defense   Correspondent,  London  Times,  Nov.  12.
anti-missile  system,  the  Russians  must  reply  with  bigger  mis-
siles   and   we  with   deeper   blast   shelters.     Fryklund   called
Nike-X  "potentially  the  most  expensive  weapon  the  world  has
ever  seen."    It  would  cost  anywhere  from  $20  to  $5O  billions,
the  biggest  bonanza  ever  offered   the  military-industrial com-
plex.    It  may  protect  Johnson  from  the  Republicans  and  Mc-
Namara   from  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   but  it  will   end   the
present   period   of  relative  relaxation  between  East  and  West
and  set  off  a  spiral   of  growing   suspicion  and  mutual  peril.
The  military  see  an  endless  arms  race  as  "a  peace  race"—
so  Gen.  McConnell  termed  it.    The  plane  and  missile  makers
see  the  problem  as  if  they  were  building  automobiles—every
year  there  ought  to  be  new  models  to  maintain sales.    So  now
after   Polaris  A-l,  A-2  and   A-3  we  have  Poseidon.     They
won't   be   satisfied   even  with   two  missiles  in   every  garage.
The  average  American,  too,  tends  to  see  defense  in  the  same
terms,  as  if  weapons  were  another  form  of  consumer  durables
to   be  produced   by  mass  production—conveniences   we   just
can't  have  too  many  of,  like  washing  machines  and   electric
cocktail  mixers.
(This  is the  third  of  four  articles. Conclusion next  week.)
A  Nazi  for  Chancellor?  We  Ought  to  Be  Glad  Adolf's  Unavailable  for   Renomination!
That   a  former  Nazi  could  be   nominated  Chancellor  of
Germany  should surprise no  one.   A  number  of  recent items
show  how little  the  mentality  of  most  Germans has  changed.
One  was  the  death  of  Gen. Diet rich  von  Chotlitz,  who  sur-
rendered  Paris  instead  of   burning  it   down.    To  have  de-
stroyed  Paris  would  have been another of  the  Reich's unfor-
giveable  crimes.   One would  have  thought that  the Germans
would  have  been  grateful   to .von  Chotlitz  for  refusing,  in
the  last  hopeless  hours of  the  war, to  carry  out  a  half-mad
Fuehrer's   orders   to  destroy   that   treasured   city.    Instead
von   Chotlitz   was   snubbed   by   his   fellow   officers   while   a
POW  in  Clinton,  Miss,  and  ostracized  in  Germany  when  he
returned.
A  second  item  was  (he  interview  given  the  German  week-
ly,  Der  Spiegel,  by  Albert  Speer,  the  architect  who became
Hitler's  Armaments  Minister.   Speer has  just  been  released
from   Spandau   as  a  war  criminal.    Speer  said  he  became
disillusioned  with  Hitler  in  1944 when  "I  suddenly realized
that  he  had  a  monstrously fat  nose."    In  1944 in  the smok-
ing  ruins  of  Germany  and  Europe  Speer  couldn't  find  any
better  reason  for  his  dillusion  and  two  decades  later  he's
naive  enough  to  admit  it!    Only  German  soil  grows  quite
such  splendid  dummkopfs.
A   third  item  concerns  jolly   Hermann  Goering.    One  of
the  Reich's  most  widely   circulated  weeklies  has   begun   to
publish  the  memoirs  of  his   widow,  Emma.    The  memoirs
are  bathed  in  goo.    They  tell  how  Hermann  asked  Emma
"Do  you   want   me   to  appeal  for  mercy?" and  his   widow
said,  "No,  Hermann,  you  can  now  die  in  peace."   Emma
wrote  that  when  the  family  heard  he  had  hung  himself  in
his  cell,  his  daughter  said  "I know,  Mommy,  how  he  got  the
poison.    An  angel  pushed  aside  the  ceiling  of  the  cell  and
dropped  the  capsule  to  him."   We  can  just   see   good Ger-
mans  shedding tears over  their  bhitwurst  as  they  read  this.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  21, 1966
Time  to  Stop  Postponing  A  Peace  Settlement  Between  Arab  and Israeli
Every  unsettled  border  is  a  powder  keg.    The   borders  be-
tween  Israel  and  its  Arab  neighbors,  like  those  between  East
and  West  Germany,  North  and  South  Korea,  North  and  South
Vietnam,  Taiwan  and  mainland China,  may  set  off wider  con-
flicts at  any  time.    The  cold  war  has  developed   the  danger-
ous  habit  of  leaving  borders  to  military  truce  lines,  ducking
the  always  difficult   task  of  negotiating   peace.    The  U.S.  op-
poses  Israeli  reprisals,  as  it  has  French  and  British  in  Tunisia
and  Aden  respectively  in  recent  years,  but  our  giant  air  raids
on  North   Vietnam   are   the   worse   example   of   reprisal   the
world  has  seen  since  Guernica,  and  with  much  less  provoca-
tion  than  that   suffered   -by  the   Israelis.     The   Soviet  Union,
playing  up  to  the  Arabs  (as  the  oil  company-prone   State  De-
partment  would  also  like  to  do), vetoed   a  Security  Council
resolution   warning   Syria  against   recent   terrorist   raids   into
Israel.     The   urgent   lesson   is  the   need   to  bring   Arab  and
Israeli  to  the  conference  table  and  negotiate  a  general   settle-
ment,  including  compensation  and  resettlement  for  Arab  refu-
gees.    Until  that  is  done,   the  Middle   East—as  in  the  Suez
crisis—remains  a  spark  that  could   ignite  a  third  world war.
Free  Speech,  But  No  Tumults?
For  years,  Black  and  Douglas  dissenting,  like  Holmes   and
Brandeis  dissenting  before   them,   have  been   twin  pillars  of
civil  liberties  on  the  Supreme  Court.    The  growing  split  be-
tween   them   on   civil   rights  cases  has  now   culminated   in   a
5-to-4  decision  by  Black,  upholding—for   the  first  time—the
conviction  of  peaceful  civil  rights  demonstrators.    Last  Febru-
ary   Black  was  with  a  minority  of   four  which  would   have
upheld  the  conviction  of  "psalm-singing"    Louisiana  Negroes
who  demonstrated  in  a  segregated  library.   This  time  he mar-
shalled   a   majority   of  five  to   uphold   the   conviction  of   33
Florida  A  &  M  students  who  demonstrated  peacefully  on  the
Tallahassee  jail  grounds  to  protest  the  arrest  of  other  students
for  trying  to  desegregate   local  theatres.    Black,  with  Harlan,
Stewart,  White  and  Clark  upheld   their  arrest  for  "trespass."
Douglas,   with  Warren,  Brennan  and   Fortas,   protested  that
public  authorities  could   always  find  excuses   of   this  kind   to
curtail  the  right  of  peaceable  assembly,  citing  William   Penn's
arrest  in  London   in  1610  after   a  nonconformist  sermon,  on
The  Times  Endorses  Resistance   to HUAC
".  .  .  many  students  and  many  professors  inevitably
criticize  the  society  in  which  they find  themselves.  .  .  .
When  this  happens  in  Communist Hungary  or  Fascist
Spain  or  Castro  Cuba, most  of  us  applaud the  students
and  professors  as  fighters  for  freedom,  as  indeed  they
are.     When  it  happens in  Ann  Arbor, Mich.,  or  in  Berke-
ley,   Calif.,  not  all  of   us  are  so  enthusiastic—because
the  agitation  is  for  things   we  don't  believe  in. Con-
gressional   committees  are  tempted  to  investigate.  .  .  .
The  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  has  now  appealed
to  the  nation's  college  and  university  presidents  not  to
cooperate  in  these  investigations  and  not  to  hand  over
membership  lists  of  students  organizations.  .  .  .  Free-
dom   on   campus   is   indivisible  from   freedom   in   the
larger  society."
—Editorial  in  the  New  York  Times,  Nov.  15.
the  ground  that  he  had  caused  "a  tumult."    Black's  sympathy,
too,  seems  to  flag  when  dissent  becomes   tumultous.
A  group  of  liberals  ought  to  file  a  mock  protest   with  the
Federal  Trade  Commission   against  that   full   page  ad  in  the
New  York   Times  (Nov.  14)   and  many  other  papers  headed
"Liberals  Support  China  Policy,"  opposing  Peking's  admission
to  the  United  Nations.    This  was a  prime  example  of  fraudu-
lent  packaging.    The  only  real  liberal  on  it  was  Douglas  of
Illinois,  always a  staunch  stooge  for  the  China  lobby.   Among
the  signers  were  George  Meany,  the  non  left-leaning  plumber
who  keeps  the  AFL-CIO  securely  to  the  right  of  Johnson  as
he  did  of  Eisenhower  in  foreign  policy;  his  bargain   basement
Richelieu,  the  ex-Communist  Jay  Lovestone;   Benjamin  Man-
del,  business  manager  of   The   Daily   Worker   in  Lovestone's
day   and   since  then   "research   chief"   for   the   Un-American
Committee;   O.   K.  Armstrong   of   "Reader's  Digest,"   never
before  so  identified  as  slightly  pinko;  Stanley  Hornbeck,  who
was  so  far  to  the  right  in  the  State  Department   during   the
30s that  he  wanted  to  appease  Japan  at  the  expense  of  Chiang
Kai-shek's  China,  and  Dr.   Robert  Strausz-Hupe,  the  last  of
the  Central  European  geopoliticians  and  geomancers   now  that
Haushofer  has  passed  away..   Had  we  dared  call  any  of  these
people  liberals, we  are  sure  they  would  have  sued  us  for  libel.
We'll  Be Clad to Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
11/21/66
For  the  enclosed   $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name        ..............................................................................
Street    .........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  Q
E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:   $6  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail  rates:
$16  to  Europe;   J20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED