I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jun27.pdf

============================================================

The  TV  Grilling  of  Carmkhael,  P. 2
You  Can  Always  Rely  on  Henry  Cabot   Lodge  to   Miss  The  Point
"The  junta  was  apparently  still  not  confident  enough  of
its  hold  on  Saigon  today  to  allow  a  parade  of  4,000  troops
and   armored  vehicles   to   pass   through  the  city's   streets.
The  parade was  part  of  the  celebration of Armed  Forces  Day
and  the  first  anniversary of  Ky's  government.   The  parade
was   confined   to   the   heavily   guarded  Vietnamese  General
Staff   compound  near  TanSon  Nhut  airport.    The   parade
was  seen   only  by  junta  members,  about  1,000  guests,  in-
cluding   U.S.   diplomats  and   military   officers   and   foreign
press  representatives.   Henry   Cabot  Lodge,  the  U.S.  Am-
bassador,  called  the  parade  'a  very  impressive  show.'"
—Neil  Skeehan  from  Saigon  in  New York Times,  June  20.
I. F. Stmtfs   Weekly
VOL  XIV,  NO. 23
JUNE  27,  1966
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.16  CENTS
LBJ  Scuttles  Another  Chance  for  Peace
The  opposition  to  the  war  in  the  country  is  rising,  but  the
opposition   in  Congress   seems   to  have  been   cowed.     A  year
ago  when  the  Gallup  poll  asked  whether  the  U.S.  should  con-
tinue  in  Vietnam  or  pull  out,  only  20%  were  for  pulling  out
and  66%  were  for  staying  in.   When  the  same  question  was
put  this  month,  the  percentage   for  pulling  out  had  risen  to
35%  and  that  for  staying  in  had  fallen  to  48%.     A majority,
54%,  believes  the  war  will  end  in  a  compromise  rather  than
all-out  victory;  only   17%   think  victory  likely.    But  in   the
three   days  since  the   President   indicated   at   an   impromptu
press  conference  that  he  was  going  to  escalate  the  bombing
of   the  North,  only  one  voice  in  Congress—that  of   Senator
Gruening  of  Alaska—has  been  raised  against  it.    Morse  and
Gruening  remain  the  only  two  clearly audible  voices  of  oppo-
sition  on  Capitol  Hill.
Air  Force  Fantasy
There  are  two  main  arguments  against   escalation  of   the
war  against  the  North.    The  hope  that  bombing  would  lead
North  Vietnam  to  call  off  the  war  has  proven  sheer  fantasy.
"Within  a  few  days  and  with  minimum  force"  as the  retiring
Commander  of  the  Strategic  Air  Command,  Gen.  Thomas  S.
Power  wrote  in  late   1964,   "the   conflict   in  South   Vietnam"
could  be  "ended  in  our  favor"   simply  by  bombing   selected
military  depots  in  the  North,  after  warning  civilians  away  by
announcing   "the   exact   time"   of   our   attack.    The   bombers
"would  be  virtually  invulnerable."    This  is  what  he  wrote  in
his  book,  Design  for  Survival,  a  few  months  before  Johnson
took   his   advice  and   began   the   bombing   of   the  North   in
February   1965.    Though  the  bombing  has  been  far  more  ex-
tensive  than  anything  the  SAC  commander  dared  recommend,
the  result  has  been  a  sharply  increased  flow  of  men  and  sup-
plies   to  the  South.    The  infiltration,  according  to  our  own
military  intelligence,  has  risen  from  800  a  month  last  summer
to  4,500  a  month  this  summer,  up  almost  sixfold.    American
casualties  have  risen  steeply  and  may  reach   50,000  dead  and
wounded  this  year.    Our  bombers,  instead  of  being  invulner-
able,  have  taken  very  heavy  losses.    As  this  is written we  have
just  lost  our  265th  plane  over  North  Vietnam  and  our  lllth
in  the  South  (AP   from  Saigon,  Wash.   Eve.  Star  June   21).
That  is  a  total  of   376  planes  lost  in  15  months  of  heavy  air
attack   as  compared   with  the   1,041   lost  to  enemy  action   in
the  three  years  of  the  Korean  War.     Clearly  Gruening  was
The  Continued  Exercise   in   Self-Delusion
"The  progress  reported to  me  by  Ambassador  Porter
is  impressive."
—LBJ   to  a  national   conference   of  state  legislative
leaders  at   the  White   House,  June  16.
"Q.  What   about  the   inflation   [in   Vietnam]?     How
is  the  fight  against  that  going?
"A.  Well,  that  is  going  pretty  well."
—Press   conference   same  day  at   the  State   Depart-
ment  with  Porter,  Deputy   Ambassador   in  Saigon.
"While  attention has  been  riveted on  South Vietnam's
political  crisis,  its  economic  crisis  has  begun  to  reach
such  alarming proportions  that  American  officials   here
are  deeply  concerned.   They  fear  that  if  inflation  con-
tinues,  it  could  cause  even  more  serious  political  dif-
ficulties.  .  .  .  The  price  of  rice,'  one  official  said,  'could
put  a  lot  bigger  mobs  in  the  streets  than  the  -monks
could   muster.'  -.The   most   common  brand   of   rice   in
Saigon  sold  for  800  piastres  per  100 kilograms in Janu-
ary.    The price  now  is  1,120  piastres."
—Neil  Sheehan  from"Saigon,   N.  Y  .Times,  June  17.
"The   Minister of  Economy  and  Finance  announced a
new  series  of  foreign  exchange  rates.     Officially   they
amounted  to  a  minor  devaluation of  the  piastre.    Ob'
servers   doubted  whether  they  would  substantially  ef-
fect  the  country's  galloping  inflation."
—Washington   Post  from   Saigon   June   18.
not  exaggerating  when  he  told  the  Senate  last  Tuesday  that  in
bombing   the  North   "President   Johnson   accepted   and   acted
on  the  same  kind  of  bad  advice  that  led  President   Kennedy
into  the  Bay of  Pigs   fiasco."   The  difference  is  that  Kennedy,
unlike   Johnson,   stopped   short   of   raising   the   stakes   with
American  lives when  that  other  sure-thing  gamble  failed.
The  other  argument  against  bombing  the  North  arises  from
the  peculiar  timing  of  the  President's  announcement.     Two
envoys,  one   French,   the   other   Canadian,  were   on   missions
to  sound   out  Hanoi  on  the  possibilities  for  peace  when   he
spoke.     Chester   Ronning,   the  Canadian  envoy  was  born   in
China,  speaks  Chinese,   and  was  also   in  Hanoi   last   March.
Canada,  Poland  and  India  make  up  the  International  Supervi-
sory  Commission  set  up  by  the  Geneva  conference  of   1954.
The  other  envoy,  Jean  Sainteny,  was  in  Peking  on  his  way  to
Hanoi.     It   was  M.   Sainteny  who   in   1945-46,   successfully
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  27,1966
Since When  Has Gandhi-ism  Been  Our  National  Creed?
We   found   the  questioning  of  StokeJy  Carmichael  on  Face
The   Nation   and  of  James  Meredith  on  Meet  the  Press  last
Sunday   overbearing  and   humorless.    Though   the   reporters
were  all  decent  and  liberal, they  sounded  just  a little  like  cops
in  a  back  room  putting  a  Negro  suspect  through  the  wringer.
There  was  only  one  Negro  on  the  panels,  and  he  was  pas-
teurized  enough  to  be  on  Time  Magazine.    His  position  was
like  that  of  a  Negro  trusty  assigned  to  stand  by  while  the
Sheriff  has  a  heart-to-heart  talk  with  the  prisoner.    Mr.  Car-
michael's  crime  was  to  have  abandoned   the   philosophy   of
non-violence,  and  Mr.  Meredith,  too,  was  suspected  of  slight
leanings   that   way.    Stern   white  faces  admonished   the  sus-
pects  to  come  clean.    Nobody   seemed  to  remember  that  Mc-
Namara  is  no  Mahatma  in  a  loin-cloth;  that  the  50-billion  a
year  we give  the  Pentagon  is  not  for  basic  training  in  turning
the  other  cheek;  that  we  are  not  engaged   in  dropping   Bibles
on   North   Vietnam;  and   that  we  so  take   violence   against
Negroes  and  their  white sympathizers in  the  South  for  granted
that  it  is  easier  to  get  away  with  their  murder  than  to  park
beside  a  fireplug.    Yet  almost  incredulously Mr.  Carmichael
was  asked  "You  don't  reject  violence?"  and  back  came  that
sassy  answer,  "No,  I have  never  rejected  violence."    We  never
heard  such  talk  on  the  old  plantation  as  long  as  grandpappy
was  alive.    It  was  comforting,  however,  that  Mr.   Meredith,
citing  the  benefits  of  nine  years  in  the  Air   Force,  was  able
to  assure TV  listeners  that  he  thought  non-violence  was  fine.
We  hope  General  Le  May  was  listening.
Political  Heat  Rash
The  Senate  Internal  Security  Committee  must  be   suffering
from  political heat  rash.    Its  report  on  the  Communist  Youth
program,  the  du  Bois  Clubs  and  the  campus  peace  movement
is  the  most  turgid'bit of  tripe this committee,  a  doddering  relic
of    the   witch   hunt,   has   yet   to   turn   in.     One   of    the
wooziest  aspects  was  the  adoption  of  a  new  technique.     In-
stead   of   subpoening  witnesses   who   had   been   "flamed",   as
McCarthy  used  to  say,  the  staff  sent  them  a  letter  saying,  in
one  typical  case,  "On  May  18,  1965,  testimony  was  adduced
whereby   the   subcommittee  was  informed   in   substance   that
while  an  employee  of  the  U.S.  Geodetic  Survey,  Menlo  Park,
you  participated  in  picketing  a  Government   agency  in  I960,
the   House  Committee  on  Un-American  Activities,"  and  ask-
ing  whether  he  had  anything  to  say for  himself.    The  exhibits
Minor   Non-Lamentable   Disasters   Dept.
"John  Roche,  professor  at  Brandeis,  former  president
of  ADA   and  speech-writer  during  the   1964  campaign
for  Vice  President  Humphrey,  was  a  leading  contender
to  succeed  Walt  Rostow  as  chairman  of  the  State  De-
partment's  Policy   Planning   Staff.    The  job,  however,
went  to  Henry  Owen,  Rostow's  deputy.     Insiders   say
Roche's  past  ADA  connection  hurt  him  with  conserva-
tives  and his  present  pro-Administration stand  on Viet-
nam  turned  his  former  ADA  colleagues  against  him."
—Postscripts  in  Washington  Post, June  20.
in  the  back  of  the  report   show  that  the  accused   thereupon
consulted   a  lawyer,  and  the  lawyer  (in   this  case  Lawrence
Speiser  of  the  American  Civil  Liberties  Union's   Washington
office)   replied,  "In  order  for  us  to  make  an  intelligent  deci-
sion  as  to  whether  the  testimony  was  adverse  and  whether  he
should  accept  your  offer  to  appear,  we  would  like  to  request
a  copy  of  the  transcript .  .  ."  and  "of  the  rules  of  procedure."
The  typical  reply  was  (we  quote  that  to  Mr.  Speiser),   "The
subcommittee  declines  to  be  drawn  into  a  controvery  because
of   the  extension  of  a  courtesy."    That  ended  it,  but  in  the
report   itself   these  requests  to  see  the  transcript  are  adduced
as  evidence  of  a  "subtle"  Communist  plot!
McGeorge   Bundy's  testimony  calling  on  the  Germans  to
accept  the  Oder-Neisse  line  and  to  give  up  nuclear ambitions
was  (io  surprise  to  those  who  knew  his  efforts   during   the
Kennedy   Administration  to   unfreeze  German   policy.  .   The
Bundy  testimony  must  be  read,  however^  in  the  light  of  de
Gaulle's   visit  to  Moscow,   which  has  started  a  race  both  in
Washington   and   Bonn  to   deal  with  the  Russians  on   Ger-
many  directly  before  de  Gaulle  can  make  a  deal  over  their
heads.    The  essential  point   about_. the  de  Gaulle  visit,  how-
ever,   is  that  both   Moscow   and  Washington  are  against   the
policy  of  power   blocs  only  on  the  other  side  of   the   fence.
Each  would  like  to  dissolve   the  other's  bloc  but  each  hates
to  see  independence  in  its  own.    Each  has  been  talking  freely
about  German  unity,  as  long  as  there  was  no  danger  of  its
achievement.    But  the  time  is coming  in  which  both  will  have
second  thoughts.    For  if  Germany  is  unified,  Europe  will  be
unified  and  if  Europe  is  unified  both  the  Russian  and  Ameri-
can-led  blocs  will  dissolve.    This  is  what  neither  Big  Power
capital  really  desires.
Samples  of  the  Queries  Some  Senator  Ought  to  Be  Able  to  Put  to  The  CIA
When   and  if   that  long   postponed   battle  over  the   CIA
bursts  out  on  the  Senate  floor,  here  are  three  items  which
indicate  the  need  for  more  stringent   control:
(1)   The  recent  massacre   of   Communists,  real  and   sus-
pected,  in  Indonesia,  was  one  of  the  worst  blood-baths   even
of  our  sanguinary  times.     Estimates   of  the  number  killed
range  from  300,000  to  1,000,000.   Did  the  CIA have a  hand?
"There  was  a  great   deal   more  contact   between   the   anti-
Ctmmunist  forces  in that  country and at  least  one  very  high
official   in   Washington,"  James   Reston   wrote  in   the   New
York  Times  June  19,  "than  is  generally  realized."
(2)   The  Times  of   London  reported  June  18  from   Wash-
ington  that  the  U.S.  has  reports  that  nationals of  a  friendly
country  have been  financing  the  Buddhist  opposition  in  Viet-
nam,  that  millions of  piastres  have  been  in  Hue  and  Danang
and  that  "one  man,  said  to  be  a  professor,  has  been  identi-
fied."   This  originated  in  a  briefing  given  West   European
correspondents   by   LBJ.    The  country   accused   is   France.
The  French  are  furious  over  this  typical  Vietnamese  canard,
which  recalls  similar  tall  tales  about  French  funds  in  Gen-
eral  Khanh's  earlier  coup  against  "Big"  Minh.    How  come
such   unverified  drivel   can   reach   the   President    as   hard
intelligence?
(3)  Robert  McCloskey, State  Department  spokesman,  told
the  press  last  week  Castro  hadn't  been  seen  in  Cuba  since
May   1.    Le  Monde  reports   from  Havana   (June   18)   that
this  has  evoked  surprise   in  Cuba  where  Castro  was  at  a
televised  public  meeting  June  4  and  received  the  Secretary
General  of   UNESCO  June  13.    What's  wrong  with  CIA's
network  in  Cuba  that  we  can  be  so  misinformed?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  27,1966
Do  You  Have  to  Be  An  Informer  to  Qualify  As  A  Good  American?
A  Washington   dispatch  in  the  New   York   Times  June  17
said   the   Board   of   Immigration  Appeals   had   ruled   that  a
former   Communist  need   not   become  an   informer   to  avoid
deportation.    We  are  sorry  to  report  that  this  is  not  correct.
The  decision  to  which  that  story  referred  was  handed  down
in  the  Williams  case.    This  stirred  so  much  indignation  in
England  at  one  time that  it  was  the  subject  of  a  debate  in  the
House  of  Commons  and  of  a  plea  from  the  British  govern-
ment  to  the  State  Department  against  his  deportation  to  that
country.
Wife  and  Child  Native  Born
Frederick  J.  Williams  was born  in  Wales.   He  came  to  this
country  at  the  age  of  one.    His  wife,  child  and  siblings  are
native  born;  one  brother  was  killed  fighting  for  the  United
States.    He  was  nevertheless  ordered  deported   12  years  ago
(1954)  on  the  ground  that  he  had  been  a  Communist   from
1931  to  1947.    One  of  the  grounds  for  deportation  was  that
the  sincerity  of  his  defection  was  put  in  doubt  by  his  refusal
to  inform  on  his  ex-comrades  for   the   Immigration  Service.
It  would  have  been  a  pleasure  to  report  that  the  Board  of
Immigration  Appeals  had  handed  down  a  decision  declaring
that  an  alien  does  not  have  to  be  an  informer  to  prove  that
he  is  qualified  to  stay  in  this  country.    His  credentials  were
good.     His  union,  the  Auto  Workers,  assigned   its  counsel,
Joseph  L.  Rauh,  Jr.,  to  defend  him.   The  Michigan  AFL-CIO
and  the  Greater  Detroit  Industrial  Union  Council  have'been
battling  his  deportation.    The  President  of  the  Detroit  City
Council  signed  an  affidavit  in  his  favor.    The  county  auditor
of   Wayne   County,  Michigan,  who   describes  himself   as   "a
commie  fighter  from  a  way  back",  testified  that  he  knew  Wil-
liams  when  the  latter  was  "a  commie"   and  is  satisfied   that
Jie  is so no  longer.    His  pastor  Wore that  Williams  is  leading
a  Christian  life   and   attends  church  regularly.    A   neighbor
told  investigators  "she  believed  he  had  an  American attitude."
This  was  not  enough  for  the  Board.    It  also  inferred  op-
position  to  Communism  from  the  fact  that  in  1961,   six years
after  the  deportation  order,  he  finally  gave  in  and  told   the
FBI  who  was  active  with  him   in  the  party  and   offered   to
testify  against  them.    The  Board  also  inferred  rectitude  from
the  fact  that  on  two  occasions  he  offered  to  testify  before  the
Un-American   Activities  Committee.     While   Williams   then
End  of  Another  McCarthy Era  Relic
Free  trade  unions,  as  Meany  and  Lovestone  often  ob-
serve,  are  unions  free  from  government  control.    The
Mine,  Mill  case,  as  they  never  seemed  to  notice,  was  a
test  of  this  in  our  own  society.    The  Communist  Con-
trol  Act  of  1954  provided  that  any  union  found  to  be
"Communist   infiltrated"  by   the   Subversive   Activities
Control   Board  would  be  barred  from  NLRB  elections.
It  would  thus  have  prevented  workers  from  voting  for
a  union  the  government  had  blacklisted.   The  first  and
only  attempt  to  enforce  these  constitutionally   dubious
provisions  has  now  been   dropped   by  the  Justice   De-
partment  after  11  years  of  litigation.     Four  years  ago
the  Court  of  Appeals  threw  out  an  earlier  SACB  order
against  the  Mine,  Mill  & Smelter  Workers  Union  on  the
ground  that   the  evidence  was  "stale".    It  was  not  so
much  stale  as  rancid,  since  it  was  based  on  the  gamey
testimony   of  dubious  informers.    This  marks  the  end,
we  hope,  of  qity  attempt 'to  enforce  this  relic  of  the Mc-
Carthy  era.    We  only  pause. to  note  that  we  owe  the
original  act  (as  the  Weekly   protested  at  the  time)  to
the  effort  of  the  Senate's  liberals  under  Humphrey and
Morse  to  prove  themselves  more  anti-Communist  than
McCarthy!
P.S.   The  Supreme   Court's   new  decision  ordering  a
new  (third)  trial  for  six  officers  of  Mine, Mill  for  crimi-
nal   conspiracy   to   evade   the   non-Communist   affidavit
provisions   of   the  Taft-Hartley   Act  will  probably  end
in  acquittal,  if  the  case  is  not  dropped  by  Justice.    The
Court  gave  them  access  to  grand  jury  minutes  to  show
discrepancies  in  the  informer  testimony   against  them.
If  this  adds   to  the  discrepancies  already   evident   be-
tween  their  trial  testimony   and  their  testimony  before
SACB  and  HUAC,  conviction  is  most ,«mlikely.
declined   to  name   names,   the   Board   is  impressed   that   "he
now  states  that  if  he  had  been  called  and  had  been   pressed
to  give  names,  he  would  have  done  so.".
In  other  words,  poor  Williams  has  proven  himself  a  man
of  character  by  abandoning  his  principles  under  the  terrible
fear   of   being   deported.     He   has   proven   himself   a  good
American,  by  finally   agreeing   to  be  a  political   stoolpigeon;
this  is  also  the  ultimate  test  of  loyalty  applied   to   suspected
heretics  in  the  Communist  bloc.    It  is  not  enough   to  be  a
Christian.    One  must  also  be  a  Judas.    These  are  the  princi-
ples  of  Americanism  to  be  inferred  from  this  decision.
Black  Again  Swings  The  Supreme  Court  Against  The  Civil  Rights  Movement
The  5-to-4  decision  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the   Rachel
and  Peacock  cases  last  Monday  were  bad  news  for  the  civil
rights  movement.   The  majority, through  Mr. Justice  Stew-
art,  interpreted  very  narrowly  a  century-old  Reconstruction
statute  providing   for  the  removal   of  civil  rights  cases  to
the  Federal  courts.    The  Court  allowed  removal  for  20  per-
sons  arrested  for  criminal  trespass   when  they  tried  to  in-
tegrate  an  Atlanta,  Georgia,  restaurant.    Here  the  Court
held  that  what  was  trespass  under  Georgia  law  was  a  civil
right  under  the  public  accommodations  section  of  the  Civil
Rights  Act  of  1964.   State  prosecution  was  therefore  barred.
But  the  same  majority  declined  to  allow  removal  in  the
cases  of  29  persons   arrested   on  various  charges,   such   as
obstructing  traffic,  during  a  Negro  voter  registration  drive
in  Leflore  country,  Mississippi.    The  Court  held  there  was
no  Federal  law  conferring  an  absolute  right  "to  obstruct  a
public  street"  nor  conferring  "immunity  from  state  prose-
cution  on such  charges."   The State  police  thus  have  a  wide
range  of  subterfuges  on  which  to  arrest  civil  rights  workers
without  risking  removal  to  a  Federal  court.
Douglas,   Warren,   Brennan   and  Fortas   dissented.     Had
Black  joined  them  the  Mississippi  cases  would  have   gone
the  other  way  but  he  is  generally  unfriendly  to  sit-in  and
other  direct   action  techniques.    The  practical   difference  is
enormous.     The   Court's   ruling   will   force    arrested    civil
rights   workers   to  go   through   prolonged   litigation   in  the
hostile  State  courts  before  they  can  appeal  to  the  Federal.
The  Justice   Department  filed  a  brief  amicus,  asking  the
Court   to   interpret   the   removal   privilege   liberally.     Now
the  Administration  should  be  pressed  to  support  either  the
Javits-Kennedy   removal   amendment   to   the   pending   Civil
Rights  bill  or  the  removal   provisions   in  the  Douglas-Case
bill,  which  would  give  Negroes  access  to  the  Federal  courts
wherever  the  "climate  of  racial  justice"  prevents  fair   trial.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, June  S7,1966
Why  U  Thant  Spoke  So Bitterly  of Our  "Barbarous   War"
(Continued  from  Page  One)
negotiated  with  Ho  Chi  Minh  an  agreement  whereby the  Viet
Minh  were  to  stay  in  the  French  Union  in  return  for   self-
government.    The  breakdown- of  that  agreement  under  right-
ist  French  military  pressure  led  to  the  long  war  which  ended
at  Dien  Bien  Phu.    M.  Sainteny  has  told  the  story  with  im-
pressive  magnanimity   in   his  Histoire  d'Une   Paix   Manquee
(Paris,  1953).    He  will  be  received  by  Ho  as  an  old  and
trusted  friend,  the  fellow  survivor  of  an  historic  lost  oppor-
tunity  for   a  peaceful  and  honorable  settlement.
A  Moment of  Fragile  Hope
Three   days   before   the   President's   press   conference,   Le
Monde   (June  15)   carried  an  Agence  France  Presse  dispatch
from  Hanoi  saying that  diplomatic circles  in  the  North  Viet-
namese  capital  had  begun  to  feel  a  little  optimistic about  the
possibility  of  negotiations.    A  "still  fragile"  hope  was  based,
according  to  AFP,  on  three  factors  (1)  all  North  Vietnam's
allies  except  Peking  ardently  desire  a  swift  end  of  the  war,
(2)   While  Peking  18  months  ago  violently  attacked  Moscow
for  trying  to  help  the  Americans  make  a  face-saving  with-
drawal  from  Vietnam,  Hanoi  was  now  ready  to  do  just  that,
(3)   North  Vietnam  felt  strong  enough  to  make  peace  with-
out  loss  of  face  itself,  since  it  feels  able  to  weather  American
bombing    "however    severe."      AFP    also    reported     that
Premier  Pham  Van  Dong,  in  the  presence  of  a  Soviet  blot
diplomat,  is  said  tb  have  declared  that  Vietnam  "like  France,
was  an  advocate  of  neutralization."
This  moment  of  reviving hope  for  peace  was a  strange  time
for  the  President  to  announce,  as  he  did  June  18,  that   "We
must  continue  to  raise  the  cost  of  aggression  at  its  source"
i.e.  to  step  up  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam.    This  was  a
good  way  to  nip  in  the  bud  any  possibility  of  success  for  the
Canadian-and  French  peace  probes  before  they  had  a  chance.
Mr.  Johnson's  swift   action  to  discourage  peace   negotiations
recalls  that  his  bombing  of   the  North   began   in   February,
1965,   the   day   after   the   Soviet  Premier,  Kosygin,_reached
Hanoi   on   an  earlier   peace  mission.     A  working  group   of
scholars   at   Berkeley   and   at   Washington   University  in   St.
Louis   were  about  to   release  a   100-page   "Citizens'   White
A  Peculiar  Way to  Pacify
"The  President   received  an  encouraging  report  from
Wm.  Porter,  Deputy Ambassador  to  Saigon,  on progress
of  the  rural  pacification program  in  Vietnam."
—New  York  Times,  June  IT.
"President    Johnson   complains   that   newsmen   have
ignored  the  civil  pacification program  in Vietnam.   He'd
understand  why  if  he was  a  reporter trying to  get  some
straight   facts   about  it.     At   a  White  House   briefing
this   week,   Ambassador   Porter   and   Presidential    As-
sistant  Robert  Komer  told  newsmen  the  program  has
been  so  successful  that  large   numbers  of  South  Viet-
namese   are   leaving   Viet   Cong   areas.     How  many?
Komer  said the monthly rate  is  now 20,000.   Asked how
this  compared  with  last  year,  he  referred  reporters   to
the  State  Department.    It  confirmed the  20,000 a  month
rate,  but  said  it  was  50,000  a  year  ago  and  added  that
refugee  flow  had  nothing  to  do  with  pacification."
—Washington  Daily  News,  June  18.
To  speak  plainly—it's  our  heavy  bombing that  forces
people  to  flee from  Viet  Cong  areas  not  "pacification".
Paper"  on  "The  Politics  of  Escalation"  this  week-end  in  which
they   demonstrate  that   Mr.   Johnson   has   escalated   the   war
whenever  pressure  rose  for  peace  at  home  or  the  possibilities
of  negotiation   improved   abroad.
Perhaps  this  is  why,  two  days  after   the  President's   press
conference,  Secretary  General  U  Thant  of  the  United  Nations
spoke  so bitterly  of  this  "barbarous  war"  arid  again  suggested
that  peace   could   be  achieved  only  by  de-escalation,   by  an
end  to  the  bombing  of  the  North,  and  by a  readiness  to  enter
into  discussions  with  those  who  are  "actually  fighting",   i.e.
the  NLF.   LBJ has  set his  face  against each  of  these  measures.
'The  Citizens'  White  Paper  shows  that  on  several  occasions  U
Thant's   own   initiatives  for   peace   have  been   squelched   by
Johnsonian  escalations.    The  only  logical   conclusion   is  that
Johnson  does  not  want  negotiations  which  will  entail  with-
drawal  from  South Vietnam.   He  wants  to  crush  the  rebellion
and  reestablish  a South  Vietnam securely within  the  U.S.  orbit,
even  if  that  means  burning  up  much of  the  country North  and
South  in  the  process.                                                          Jane  21
Notices:  Next  Weekly   (summer schedule)  July  11.    We   gratefully  acknowledge  the   services  of   Peter   Osnos
during  the  past year  as editorial assistant.
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6/27/30
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Z<me.....»..,..SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished Q
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  P.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and   the
first  week   in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the   U.S.:    $6  in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.     Air.  Mail   rates:
Ho  to  Europe;   S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED