I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966oct03.pdf

============================================================

Bobby  Kennedy   Wordy  and   Tepid  on  Peace,  P.  2
And  Vietnam  Provides  No  Reasons  to  Believe  They've  Grown  Any  Smarter
"What  could  I  have  said  .  .  .  ?   That  the  CIA  and the  Pentagon  are  stupid?"
—John  F.  Kennedy's   angry  outburst  after   his  first  post-Bay   of  Pigs  press  conference,  as  now  disclosed  by  Pierre
Salinger  in  his  book  "With  Kennedy"   p.  155.   For  extended  comment  turn  to  page  3  of  this  week's  issue.
1. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  30
October   3,   1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  Should  They  Trust  Johnson  Any More Than We Do?
Goldberg  under  Johnson  is  stuck  at  the  UN,   as  Stevenson
so  often  was  under  Kennedy,  with  the  task  of  making  black
look  white,  a  belligerent  policy  look   peaceful.     His   speech
at  the  General  Assembly  is  to  be  read  not  as  diplomacy  but
as  public  relations.    It  will  go  down  in  the  annals  as  another
of  those  peace  offensives  with  which  his  master  has  prefaced
his  successive  escalations.    Even  as  the  dove  cooed,  the  hawks
swooped.     B-52  raids  on   the   demilitarized   zone   marked  a
qualitative  escalation,  for  these  had  only  been  used  once  be-
fore  in  the  North,  against  Mugia  pass  last  April;  McNamara
announced   a  30%   increase  in  warplane  production;  and  in
Washington,  the  White  House,  the  Pentagon  and  State,  in
horrified   unison,  denied   reports   in  New   York   and   London
that  the  U.S.  planned  to  suspend  its  bombing  to  give   Hanoi
more  time  to  consider  Goldberg's  proposals.    To  make  sure
Goldberg  was  not  taken  too  seriously  by  the  other  side,  John-
son  held  a  press  conference  the  same  day  and  declined  when
asked  to  characterize Goldberg's  proposals  as  either  important
or  new.   This was probably  the  most  honest  statement  Lyndon
Johnson  ever  made.    All he would  say was,  "I  think  it  is good
for  him  to  say  it,"  as  if  this  were  an  exercise  in  occupational
therapy  to  keep   a  frustrated   UN   spokesman   from   blowing
his  top.
Neatly  Contrived  Pitfalls
Goldberg's  speech  had  to  fit  the  crusty old  elements  of  past
Johnson  and  Rusk  peace  offers  into  a  shiny  new  case  designed
to  look  as  much  as  possible  like  the  real  thing—that  is,  U
Thant's  Three  Points.    When  the  works  are  opened  up,  it  is
easy  to  see  how  different  Goldberg's   is.    In  the  first  place,  he
is  still  trying  to  collect  a  price  for  Johnson's  blackmail  bomb-
ings  of  the  North.    U  Thant's  Point  1 was the  unconditional
cessation  of  these  bombings.    But  Goldberg's  is  to  stop  them
only  if  assured  "that  this  step will  be  answered  promptly  by  a
corresponding   and   appropriate   de-escalation   from   the  other
side."    The  italics,  which  are  ours,  light  up  the  trap.    How
fast  would   we  consider  prompt   and  how  much  withdrawal
would   we   accept   as  appropriate   and   corresponding?     The
North  would  have  to  come  hat  in  hand  to  satisfy  us  on  the
price  of  ending   our  bombardment,  and   act  under   threat  of
resumption.    In  effect  the  first  step  would  be  not  a  time-table
of  our  withdrawal,  as  de  Gaulle  suggested,  but  a  time-table  of
theirs.    Until  we  got  our  assurance,  we  would  not  put  into
effect  this  "prior"  cessation.    The  weaker  power  must  submit
to  the  stronger.     In  addition  the  North,  by  bargaining   its
withdrawal  against  our  bombardment,  would  have  to  equate
Asian  Powers  or  Uncle  Sam's  Coolies?
Only  Americans,  not  Asians,  will  be  taken  in  by  the
spectacle  of  Johnson's  forthcoming  "Asian  summit"  at
Manila.    It's   the   absentees   not  the  participants  who
tell   the   story.     Neither   our   SEATO   ally   Pakistan,
nor  Japan  nor  powers  as  anti-Communist  as  Malaysia
and  Indonesia  will  take  part.    They  shun  the  charade
as  too  obvious.   Indonesia is  fresh  from  an anti-Com-
munist  purge  which  turned  into  one  of  the  worst  blood
baths  in  history  but  its  new  anti-Peking Foreign Min-
ister,  Adam  Malik,  has  been  calling  for  unconditional
cessation  of  U.S.  bombing in North Vietnam as  the  first
essential  step  to  peace  in  every  capital  he  has  visited,
New  Delhi,  Algiers,  Cairo  and  most  recently  Belgrade.
Only  the  Asians  most  blatantly on  our  payroll  will  be
at  Manila—the  Vietnamese  and  South  Korean military
juntas,   the   corrupt  Filipino  oligarchs  and  the   tradi-
tionally  mercenary  Thais,  the  first  to  sell  out  to  the
Axis.    Our  military  are  always  boasting  of  how  much
less  these  Asian  soldiers  cost.    It's  not  the  upkeep,  it's
the  down  payment that  matters.   Marcos  has  just  made
off  with  $55,000,000  in  aid  to  send  2,000  of  his  soldiers
(non-combat  yet!)  to  Vietnam.    That's  over  and  above
their  equipment  and  upkeep,  or  $27,500  per  head,  the
world's  most  expensive  coolies.   When  it  comes  to  busi-
ness,  who  dares  call  the  Asians  underdeveloped?
the  two  morally,  to  justify   Johnson's   course  since  February,
1965,  and  to  admit  itself  the invading aggressor.    It  must  not
only  accept  the  conqueror's  terms  but  wipe  clean  his  bloody
hands.
From  the  North's  point  of  view  its  armed  intervention  was
only  a  response  to  the  blackmail  bombings  in  the  first  place.
It  sees  us  intervening  in  a  civil  war  which  broke  out  because
of  our  persistent  violations  of  the  Geneva  agreements.     From
a  world  point  of  view,  we  would  set  a  precedent  whereby  any
strong  power  would  be  able  to  bomb  any  weak  power   until
the  weaker  accepted  its  terms.    That  is  the  jungle  law  of  re-
prisal  to  which  we  have  always  objected   when   practiced  by
other  powers  at  Sidi  Sakiet  and  Suez.    U  Thant  asked  cessa-
tion  of  the  bombings  not  only  as  unmistakable -evidence  of  a
good  faith  otherwise  all  too  questionable  but  as  obedience  to
world   law.
In  U  Thant's  view  this  would  set  the  stage  for  Point  2,  a
mutual  reduction  of  military  activity in  the  South  to  pave  the
way  for  a  cease-fire  and  peace  talks.    But  Goldberg's  Point  2
is  full   of   tricky  pitfalls.    He  wants  "a   supervised,   phased
withdrawal  of  all  external  forces."    What  would  be  left  after
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 3, 1966
Bundestag  Minority  on  Eve  of  Erhard's  Visit  Shifted  Against  Nuclear  Weapons
Johnson  Seems  to  Think  New  State  Dept.  Choices  Devilishly  Clever
FRESH  FACES TO  COVER  STALE  POLITICS:  That's all
the  new  State  Department  appointments  mean.    Katzenbach
made  a  good  record   as  Attorney  General;  Johnson   will  ruin
him,  as  he  ruined  Humphrey  and  Goldberg,   by  using  him  as
another  front  on  Vietnamese  policy.   Eugene  V.  Rostow,  who
served   in  the   State  Department  under   Acheson,   shares  his
brother,  Walt's,  hard  line  in  foreign  affairs.    Foy  Kohler,  the
third  of  the  new  appointments,   is  one  of  those  colorless  dip-
lomats  who  fits  so  perfectly  into  the  Rusk  woodwork.    Katz-
enbach  is  a  technician, with  no  strong  motivations.    The  best
clue  to  how  Johnson   really  thinks  about   these  appointments
was  Wm.  S.  White's  column   (Washington   Post,  Sept   24).
I  once  described  the  personally  likeable  White  as  the  Wyatt
Earp  of  American  journalism;  he's  closer  to  Johnson's   wave-
length  than  any other  Washington   journalist.   White  saw  the
appointments  as  devilishly clever—Katzenbach  would  help  to
sell  Bobby  Kennedy;  Eugene  Rostow,  the  intellectuals,  on  the
Vietnamese  war.    In  "Prof.  Rostow,"  White  wrote, jubilantly,
Johnson   had   acquired   "an   authentic  intellectual,  a  kind  of
Pope  or  at  least  a  cardinal  in  the  hierarchy  of  the   academics."
If  we  may  be  forgiven  a  pun,  we  suppose  Johnson  will  soon
expect   Rostow  to  produce  an  encyclical  built  for  two.
McNamara  Scares  the  Germans
GERMANY  AND  NUCLEAR  ARMS:  Most  of  the  press,
including  the  New   Yark   Times   failed  to  cover  two  signally
important  events  which provided  the  background  for  Erhard's
visit  to  Washington.     One  was  the  fact  that  the  Free   Demo-
crats  joined  the  Social  Democrats  during  a  Bundestag  debate
on  the  eve  of  the  visit  in  calling  for  a  German  finger  on   "the
safety  catch"  rather  than  the  trigger,  i.e.  a  veto  on  the  use  of
nuclear  weapons  on  German  soil,  East  or  West.    The   Free
Democrats   and   the   Social   Democrats   between  them   control
249  of  the  496  votes  in  the  Bundestag,  which  means  a  ma-
jority  against  the  continued  drive  of  the  Christian  Democrats
and  the  military  for  nuclear  weapons.    The  Free  Democratic
chairman  told  the  Bundestag  that  anxiety  about  German   nu-
clear  ambitions  was  not   confined   to  East  Europe.     Helmut
Schmidt,  the  Social  Democratic  defense  spokesman,  proposed
that  West  Germany  renounce  nuclear  ambitions  in  favor  of
membership  on  a  NATO  nuclear  consultative  committee,   as
proposed  by McNamara.    Erhard's  Foreign  Minister,  Schroed-
er,  showed   his  government's   colors  when  he  disparaged   the
whole   idea   of   a   non-proliferation   agreement.     While   the
debate  was going  on,  McNamara  at  the  NATO  conference  in
Rome   won   unanimous  agreement   for   his   consultative   pro-
posals.  The  Defense  Correspondent   of  The  Times   (London)
reported   (Sept.  21)   McNamara   not  only  hoped  this   would
prove  a  substitute  for  any  MLF  but  had  "so  re-educated"  the
West  German  Defense  Minister  "in  the  complexities  of  nu-
clear   defense   .  .  .  that   pressure   for  nuclear   hardware   for
Germany  is  now  expected   to  cease."    It's  a  pity   McNamara
can't  frighten  off  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   as  easily.
ADAM    CLAYTON    POWELL'S   WING-TRIMMING:
It's  nonsense  to  call  this  racism.    The  revolt  was  run  by  lib-
erals  who  have  worked  much  harder  than  he  on  civil   rights
and  poverty  legislation.    Adam  is  the  Nkrumah  of  Harlem,
a  brilliant  man  whose  career  was  ruined  by  the  temptations
of   power.   .  .  .
MIHAILOV'S    CONVICTION   IN   YUGOSLAVIA:     It
will  make  him  a  hero  of  the  young  rebels  all  over  the   Soviet
bloc.     His   case   demonstrates   the   need   for   a   fundamental
overhaul,  probably   a  new  revolution,   if  freedom  of  expres-
sion  and  thought  are  ever  to  be  established  in  the   Communist
countries.    Tito's  Constitution,   like  Stalin's,   calls   for  a  free
press,  but  jail  is  the  price  of  taking  this  seriously.  .  .  .
RFK's  First  Speech  on  Vietnam  Since  Last February: Safely  Back in  LBJ's  Camp
"For  Vietnam  cannot  be a  plaything  of  politics.   The  Amer-
ican    people    will    not   allow    irresponsible   voices—whether
politicians   or   newspaper   publisher—to   deceive   them   with
talk   of   easy   and  sanitary   victory.     The   American   people
know,  the  people  of  New  Hampshire  know,  that  the  ultimate
solution  of  the  Vietnam   war  must  be,  not  just  in  force  of
arms,  but   in  patient  difficult  negotiation—negotiation  which
secures  the  vital  national  interest  of  all  the  participants,   and
the  peace  of  the  world.
"That  is  why  Ambassador   Goldberg's  speech  in  the  UN  on
Thursday   was   in  my  judgment  critically   important,  for   it
spoke  once  again  the  determination  of  the  United   States  to
reach   a   peaceful   settlement—a  settlement  which  recognizes
that  the  ultimate  future  of  Vietnam  is  for  the  Vietnamese  to
decide,  a  settlement  which  recognizes  as  well  that  all  South
Vietnamese  political  elements  have  the  right  to  'peaceful   par-
ticipation   in  their  nation's  future.'    We  should  all  commend
Ambassador  Goldberg,  as  well  as  the  President,  for  this  con-
structive  initiative.    The  Soviet  Union  and  the  North  Viet-
namese   have   responded   to   this   initiative   with   the   frozen
rhetoric   of   conflict,   but  Ambassador  Goldberg's  speech   was
still   an   important   step.    It   makes  our  own  position  clear,
and  it  may  yet  gain  a  more  constructive  answer  in the  future.
"But   even  beyond  these  difficulties,  we   should  all   under-
stand  the  complexity  of  the  war  extends  also  to  the  question
of  negotiation.   Even  if  we  were  to  arrive  at  the  conference
table,  difficult  as  it  has  been  to  move  in  that  direction,  much
more  will  be  required  to  settle  the  war.    The  actual  place of
the  National  Liberation  Front  in  the  political  life  of  South
Vietnam;  the  relationship  of  North  to  South  Vietnam,  and
the  relations  of  each  with  the  United  States, the  Soviet  Union
and  China;  the  scope  and  duration  of  international  or  other
guarantees  of  whatever  settlement  is  reached—all  these  and
more  will  remain  to  be  determined.   We  must  realize  that  a
peaceful  settlement  will  require  that  both  sides  make  some
concessions—that   both   sides  concede  matters  that  are  im-
portant  in  order  to  preserve  interests  which  are  essential.
"Before  we  can  hope  to  reach  a  settlement,  therefore,  our
position  with  regard  to  all  the  critical  issues  must  be  clear
at  least  in  our  minds.   That  position  must flow from  a  clear
understanding   of  our   role   in   Southeast   Asia   and   in   the
world—and   a  precise  assessment  of  the   likely   outcome  of
every  course  of  action.    For  we  have  a  responsibility  to  the
rest  of  the  world  and  to  our  children  to  exert  our  best  efforts
of  thought  and  talent  and  energy  to  find  a  solution,  not  an
easy  solution,  for  that  does  not  exist,  not  a  quick  solution,
for  that  does not  exist, but  a  solution  which  will  preserve  our
national  interests  without  an  even  wider  war  in  Asia."
—Text  of  Robert  F.  Kennedy's  Statement  on Vietnam  to the  New  Hampshire  Democratic  State  Convention,  Sept.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 3,1968
Salinger's  New  Book  Shows  Why  the  White  House  Tries ta Manage  the  News
What  John  F. Kennedy  Never  Understood  About  Freedom  of the  Press
Pierre  Salinger's  book   With   Kennedy   shows  how  deeply
resentful  Kennedy  was  of  press  criticism,  and  how  eager   he
was  for  some  way  to  put  restraints  on  the  press.    He  opened
his  first  press  conference after  the  Bay  of  Pigs  by  shutting off
all  questions  on  it.    "I  do  not  think,"  he  said,  "any  useful
national  purpose would be  served  by my going  into  the  Cuban
question  this  morning."    The  morning  papers  next  day  were
critical  of  his  refusal  to  discuss  the  subject.    "He  was  still
burning  when  I  saw  him  in  mid-morning,"  Salinger   relates
and  then  discloses  Kennedy's  outburst  —
"What  could I have said that would have helped the situa-
tion  at  all?   That  we took  the  beating  of  our  lives?   That
the  Cl A  and  the  Pentagon  are  stupid?    What  purpose  do
they  think  it  would  serve  to  put  that  on the  record?"   He
shook  his  head.    "We're  going  to  have  to  straighten  all
this  out,  and  soon.    The  publishers   have  to   understand
that  we're  never  more  than  a  miscalculation   away  from
war  and  that  there  are  things  we  are  doing  that  we  just
can't  talk  about."
This  passage  makes  it  easier  to  understand  why  Kennedy
was  such  a  James  Bond  fan;  the  words  reflect  that  kind  of  a
universe,   of   constant   conspiracy  and   imminent   destruction.
The  conclusions  to  be  drawn  are  the  opposite  of   Kennedy's.
If  we  are  "never  more  than  a  miscalculation  away  from  war"
then  it  certainly  does  serve  a  national  purpose  to  put  on  the
record  that  the  Pentagon  and  the  CIA  are  stupid.    For  the
greatest  danger  of  miscalculation arises  from  the  secret  opera-
tions  of  this  huge  military-intelligence apparatus.    The  safety
of  the  country  demands  more,  not  less,  knowledge  of  its  oper-
ations.    But  Kennedy's  reaction  was  his  famous  speech  to  the
American  Newspaper  Publishers'   Association  six  days  later,
asking  in  effect   for   self-censorship   in  reporting   clandestine
operations  like  the  attack  on  Cuba.    Yet  he  himself,  as  we
now  know,  told  Turner   Catledge  of  the  New   York   Times
months  later  that  he  wished  that  paper  had  published  more
about  the  Cuban  preparations  because  it  might  have  saved  the
country  and  himself  from  what  proved  to  be  a  disaster.
At  one  moment  the  naive  Salinger  talks  of  keeping   secret
"things  better  for  the  enemy not  to  know about."   But  a  more
urgent  concern  becomes plain  in  his  discussion  of  Kennedy's
Slight   Oversight
"It  is  not  only  idle  but  unfair  to  seek  out  guilty   men.
President   Elsenhower,  after   rejecting  American  mili-
tary  intervention  in  1954,  set   in  motion  the  policy  of
support  for  Saigon  which resulted,  two  Presidents  later,
in  American  military  intervention  in   1965."
—Arthur  Sehlesinger,  Jr.,   "A   Middle   Way   Out  of
Vietnam,"  New York  Times Sunday  Magazine, Sept.  18.
Military  intervention   did  not  begin  "tw&  Presidents
later" but  one—under John  F. Kennedy.  It  was he who,
in   violation  of   the   Geneva  agreement,   poured   more
than  16,000  U.S.  troops  into  the  country  between    1961
and  1963.   This  is  rewriting  history  to  fit  the  Kennedy
legend.
animosity  to  the  reporting  out of  Vietnam  in  1961-63.  "Stories
began  appearing  with  increasing  regularity,"  Salinger  writes,
"describing  heavy  involvement  of  U.S.  forces  in   Vietnamese
operations   .  .  .  they  presented  the  American  people  with  a
picture  of  widening  war  in  Southeast  Asia—and  it  was  this
picture  which  .  .  .  the  Administration did  not  want  to  pre-
sent."    Salinger   quotes  with  approval  a  silly  Detroit   News
editorial  which  backed  Kennedy's  drive  for  more  "restraint"
in  reporting.    It  said  the  First  Amendment  did  not  intend
"that  a  nation shall  commit suicide rather than  keep  a  secret."
The  real  intent  was  to  prevent  national suicide  by  making  it
difficult   for  the  government  to  operate  in  secret,  free  from
the  scrutiny  of  a  watchful press.
That   "monolithic   and  ruthless  conspiracy"  Kennedy  con-
jured  up before  the  newspaper  publishers  as  the  enemy may
prove  less  dangerous  than  the  monolithic  and  ruthless  con-
spiracy  of  cold  warriors  which  operates  through  the  Pentagon
and  the  CIA.    The  Bay  of  Pigs  showed  it  could  make  the
President  himself  a  prisoner  of  its  melodramatic  stupidities.
Vietnam  is  a  daily  reminder  of   its  mendacity and   incompe-
tence.    We  need  more  disclosure,  not  less,  if  we  are  to  pro-
tect  the  country  from   it.    But  Johnson  continues  the   efforts
at  "news  management"  Kennedy  began.
How  Goodwill Rewrote  History  in  His ADA
A  lot  of  people seem  to  think  Lyndon  Johnson  was  a  dove
on  Indochina  policy  in  1954.    One  reason  is  a  speech  that
year   by  Senator   Ed   Johnson   of   Colorado   saying  "I   am
against  sending  American  GI's  into  the  mud  and  muck  of
Indochina."    This   has   often   been   attributed   to   Lyndon
Johnson.-     A   similar   confusion    is   fostered   by   Richard
Goodwin's   speech   to  the   ADA  Sept.  17.    "Only  a   dozen
years  ago,  in  1954,"  he  declared,  "another  American  leader
assaulted   our   policy   in  Vietnam,  saying  'The   U.S.   is  in
danger  of being  left  naked  and alone  in a hostile world. . . .'
It  is  in  this  same  spirit  of  concern  for  our  country,"  Good-
win  went  on, "that  we should  conduct  our  dissent  as,  on that
day, did  Lyndon Johnson  then  leader  of the  minority  party."
The fact  is  that  the  speech  was hawkish.   Johnson  derided
Dulles,  as  we noted  at  the  time,  "for  not  standing  up  to  the
Communists  at  Geneva."   In  the  "white  paper" on the  Viet-
nam  war  issued  by  the  House  Republican  leadership  three
days  after  Goodwin spoke  to  the  ADA, that  Johnson  speech
of  1954  is  characterized   as  an  attempt  "to  pull  the  rug  out
Speech  to  Imply  LBJ  Was  A  Dove  in  1954
from  under  the  Eisenhower  Administration  as  the  critical
Geneva  conference  opened."    Johnson  said  the  Republicans
had  left  the  U.S.  "naked  and  alone"  by  failing  to  negotiate
in  time joint  intervention with  the  British  and  French.    He
did  not  want  to  see  peace  by  negotiation.
The  New  York  Times,  in  reporting   that  Johnson   speech
May   7,  1954,  said  it  marked   the   first   break   in  16  months
of  bipartisanship.   As  long  as  Eisenhower   pursued  a  hard
line  in  Latin  America  as  in  Asia,  he  had  Johnson's  backing.
Johnson   sponsored  the  "Monroc  Doctrine"   resolution   sup-
porting  Dulles's efforts  to overthrow the  Arbenz  government
in  Guatamela.    Johnson's   only   other   difference   with   the
Republican  Administration  that  year  also  found  him  to  the
right   of  Ike.    Johnson   stood   with  Knowland  in  asserting
that   the   U.S.   would  not   support   the   UN  if  it   admitted
Red  China.    Ike  had  refused   to  go  that   far.    Johnson   in
1954  was  already   showing  the  same  hard  line  attitude  so
evident  since  he  won  election  disguised  as  a  dove  10 years
later.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 3, 1966
Johnson  Still  Unwilling  to  Deal  With  the  Men  We  Are  Fighting
(Continued   from   Page One)
the  withdrawals we  had  required  in  return  for  an  end  to  the
bombings?  Who  would  supervise?  How  could  the  guerrillas
afford   to   open   up   their   secret   bases,   their   one   protection
against  our  savage  bombardments,  to  outside   view  until  as-
sured  of  a  peace  satisfactory  to  them?  What  would  we  con-
sider   "external   forces?"    How  many  would  we  accept  as  in-
digenous?  How  many  would  we  call  Northerners  in  disguise?
These  are  skillfully  hidden  mines  on  the  path  of  negotiation.
Why  We  Won't  Recognize  the  Rebels
The  guerrillas  cannot   be  expected  to  lay  down   their   arms
until  satisfied  that  .they  would  have  a  satisfactory  role  in  the
making  of  the  peace and  the  shaping  of  their  country's   future.
U  Thant's  Point  3  called  for  their  participation   in  the  settle-
ment.    "Some  argue,"  Goldberg  said,  referring  to a  lost  intra-
mural  battle  he  and  Humphrey   are  reported  to  have  waged
within  the  White  House,  "that,  regardless  of  different   views
on  who  controls  the  Viet  Cong,  it  is  a  combatant   force and,
as  such,   should   take   part   in  the   peace   negotiations."      But
Johnson   does  not   want   to  admit,   by  recognizing   the   Viet
Cong  at  the  peace  table,  that  we  have  been  fighting  an  indi-
genous  rebellion,  for  this  would  take  the  moral  grounds  from
under  our  intervention  and  the  political  grounds   from   under
his  effort   to  restore  a  safely  non-Leftist  South  Vietnam.     So
all  Goldberg  was  allowed  to  say is  that  this,  the  key question,
would   not   prove   "an   insurmountable   problem/'     Johnson
wouldn't   close  a  deal  for  a  bull  on  his  ranch  on  such   vague
terms.
The   guerrillas   must  find  no   more   reassuring   Goldberg's
vague  declaration   that  we  do  not  "seek  to  exclude  any seg-
ment  of  the  South  .Vietnamese  people  from  peaceful  partici-
pation  in  their  country's  future."     In  1954 similar  promises,
much  more  explicitly  spelled  out, guaranteed   the  Viet   Minh
an  amnesty and  full  political  rights.    These  were  broken  with
our  encouragement   and  they  were  killed  or  put  into  Diem's
concentration  camps.  That  is  when  the  rebellion  started.  How
can  you  expect  the  rebels  to  give  up  in  return  for  the  same
kind  of  promises?    What  we  offer   must  look   to  them   like
a  one-way ticket  to  the  jails  and  prison  islands  the  Ky  regime
Hiding  Our  True  Air  Losses
Two  clues  turned  up  the  past  week  which  indicate
that  the  full  extent  of  plane  losses  in Vietnam  are being
hidden  from  us.   The  New  York Times  Sept.  23,  in  re-
porting  McNamara's  30  percent  increase  in  war  plane
orders,  said  "the number  of   planes  downed  over   the
north  does  not  reflect   the  actual  loss  rate"  since  this
does   not  include  aircraft  "severely   damaged  through
anti-aircraft  fire  or  scrapped  for  other  operational  rea-
sons."   The  latest  figure  for  planes  "downed  over  the
north"  was  386  as  of  late  Monday,  Sept.  26  (AP  that
day  in  Wash. Eve.  Star).   The  phrasing  "planes  downed
over  the  North",  excludes   those  plans  which  were  hit
over  the  North  but  managed  to  glide  or  fly  to  a  crash
landing  in  the  sea  or  at  a  home base.  ..
The  latest   figure   for  planes  shot   down  over   South
Vietnam   was   123  but   "this"  the   AP   reported   from
Saigon   (Sept.   25,  Wash.  Star)   "excludes  parked air-
craft  lost  through  enemy  attacks  and  those  wrecked by
mechanical  failure."   This  makes  an  official  total  North
and  South  of  509  planes  lost.    (This  does  not  include
helicopters.)    If  as  many  more  were  put  out  of  com-
mission  by  enemy  action  in  the  other  ways  indicated
by  these  admissions,  the  total  would  be  1,000  lost.    In
the  Korean  war  almost  half  of   total  air  losses  (The
U.S.  Air  Force  in  Korea,  p.  645) were  to  non-enemy
causes.    If  the  ratio  is  similar  in  Vietnam,  the  true
totals  may  thus  easily  be  as  great  or  greater  than  the
1500-or-so  claimed  by  the  enemy.
According  to  McNamara's  own  figures  we  are  pro-
ducing  "from  800  to  1,000"  fighters  and  fighter-bomb-
ers  this  fiscal  year  and  had  planned  as  many  for  next
fiscal  year.   That  is  a  total  for  the  two  years  of  1,600
to  2,000 planes.   The  new  order adds  280 more.   That  is
a  better   index  of   the  attrition  rate  than  the   official
figure  of  509  lost.    If  the  total  lost' is  only  1,000,  then
judging  by  the  cost   of  the  new  planes  on  order, $2.5
million  each,  the  total  dollar  cost  of  these  losses  would
be  $2.5  billion.
has   already   filled   with   militant   Buddhists.*     How   many
Americans  really trust  Johnson?    Why  should  they?
* Robert   Shaplen's   estimate   of   the   number  jailed  (New
Yorker,  Aug.  20)  is  "four  or  five  thousand."
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes—
Also   PLEASE  Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers  Urgent
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly        5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street
City  ............................................  Zip..........State......................
10/3/66
For  the  enclosed   $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City  ............................................  Zip..........State......................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftiet
Indicate   if   announcement   wished   D
/ E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Are.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Clara  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December  and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.W..  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published   and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.:  $6   in   Canada:    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED