I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966oct24.pdf

============================================================

Saigon's  Ironic  Cabinet  Crisis  on  the Eve  of  Manila,  Pps. 2-3
How  to  Make  A Sharply Growing  Escalation Look  Like  Practically  None  at  All
"I  see  no  reason  to  expect  any  significant  increase  in  the
level  or  tempo  of  operations  in  South Vietnam."
—McNamara  on returning from  Saigon  Oct. H
"In   talking   with   reporters   in   Washington   on   Friday
McNamara   observed  that  barring  an   unforeseen  turn  of
events  'there  is  no  need  for  a  SUBSTANTIAL  [our  em-
phasis—IFS]   increase   in  the   rate  of   deployment.'    Since
we  have  deployed  180,000 troops  to  Vietnam  in  the  last  12
months  [and  245,000  in  the  last  15]  the  Secretary  could  be
anticipating  a  very  large  increase   by  this  time  next   year
even  if  there  is  no  increase  at  all  in  'the  rate  of  deploy-
ment'."       —Washington  Sunday  Star  News  Review  Oct. 16
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  33
October  24,  1966WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
16  CENTS
While  Others  Dodge  the  Draft,  Bobby  Dodges  the War
Robert  F.  Kennedy  is  not  setting  a  good  ex-
ample  for  American  youth.   To  be  a  trimmer,  to
put  career  ahead  of  duty,  to  be  all  but  silent  on
the  greatest  moral  and  political  issue  of  our  time
is  to  be  no  different   from  the  other  politicians.
We  are  sure  that  if  a  young  man  went  to  the
Senator   and   asked   his   advice  on  how  best   to
dodge   military   service   in   Vietnam,   Kennedy
would  regard  him  as  a  coward  and   unpatriotic.
But  we are  also  sure  that  if  we had  the  Senator's
confidence  and  asked  him  privately  why  he  was
not  speaking   out  on  the  war,  he  would  explain
it  was  too  risky,  that  he  had  already   established
a  position  slightly  to  the  left  of  the   Administra-
tion  in  his  Vietnam  speech  of  last  Feb.  19,  that
this  was  sufficient  to  hold  his  liberal constituency
and  that  anything  more  would be  politically dan-
gerous, and might  put  him in  the isolated  position
of  a  Morse  or  Gruening.  To  die  for  your  country
is   one  thing.   To   put   your   political   future   in
jeopardy  for  it  is  another.
A  Moral  Man  Where  It's  Politic
These   are   roles   we  take   for   granted   in  the
ancient   dramaturgy   of   human   conflict.    Honor
requires  the  soldier  to  kill  or  be  killed, whatever
his  scruples.   But  it  is  not  regarded  as  dishonor-
able  for  the  politician  to  swallow  his  misgivings
and   allow  the  young  to  go  out  to  die   without
protest.   Kennedy  in  the  U.S.   Senate  has  at  his
disposal  a forum second  only to  that  of the  Presi-
dency.  But  he  hasn't  said  a  word  about  the  war
in  the  Senate  since  his  one  speech  last  February.
A  wistful  committee  has   been  organized   for   a
Kennedy-Fulbright  ticket  in   1968  but  Fulbright
has  been  speaking  out  while  Kennedy  has  been
falling  silent.  Kennedy  did  not  support  his  effort
to  rescind  the  Tonkin  Bay  resolution  nor  to  alert
the  country  on  the  danger  in  Thailand.   He  even
achieved  the  feat  of  delivering  a  speech  on  peace
McNamara,  The  Negro  And  His
Army  Education
Nothing  is  harder  to  pry  out  of  the  Pentagon   than
figures  on  the  Negro  in  the  Vietnamese  war.    So  Neil
Sheehan's  dispatch in  the  New  York Times  Oct.  16  was
something   of   a  feat.     It   reported  about  33%  of   the
400,000  draft  rejects  to  be  taken  by  the  armed  services
this  year by lowering mental  standards  will be  Negroes.
It  discloses  that  despite  McNamara's  speech  last  Au-
gust   describing   this   as   an   element  in   the   War  on
Poverty  program,  in  which  the  men  would  benefit   by
special   educational  training,  there  are   neither   funds
nor  plans  for  any  such  programs.    "Officers  believe  the
men  will  end  up  in  the  more  rudimentary jobs,"  Shee-
han  wrote.   "In the  Army,  which  will  take  the  greatest
number,  this will  mean combat arms  for  the  most  part."
This  will  mean  more  Negroes  in  Vietnam.    Sheehan's
dispatch  revealed that  of  all  Army  enlisted  men  killed
in  Vietnam  during  1965,  23.5% were  Negroes,   or  more
than  twice  the  11%  ratio  of  Negroes  to  total  popula-
tion.    If  these  figures  have  educational  value,  it  is  not
the  kind  McNamara  intended.
in  New York Oct. 11 without mentioning  Vietnam!
Kennedy  thinks  of himself  as  a  moral  man.   He
proclaims it in South Africa  and in Latin  America
but  at  home, where  thousands  are  being   drafted
every  month, he  says  as  little  as  he  can  about  the
one issue that matters  most.  It  is only in response
to  questions  that  he  occasionally  speaks   of  the
war,    often  with  a  remarkable  complacency.   "We
have  to  realize,"  he  told   a  questioner   in  Iowa
(New    York   Times,  Oct.  10),  "that  the  casualties
are  going  to  continue to  be  large."  Shouldn't  he,
who  sees  himself  as  the  candidate   of  youth,  do
something  to  stop  them?  He  has  a  small  army
of  ghost  writers  turning  out  speeches  and  hunt-
ing  up  apt  quotations.    AVhy  not  on  the  war?
At  Hunter   College  in  New  York   recently  he
confined  himself,  as  Brother   Teddy  does,  to  the
safe  topic  of  aid  to  Vietnamese refugees.   He  met
"all   questions   on  the  propriety   of  the  war   in
Vietnam,"  the  New  York   Times  reported  Oct.  8,
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October H, 1966
Saigon's  Cabinet  Crisis  on  The   Eve
The  Cabinet  crisis in  Saigon couldn't  have come
at  a happier moment than  on the eve of the Manila
conference.   The  Ky  regime  is  supposed  to  take
over  pacification,  presumably  leaving  the  heavy
fighting  to  U.S.  troops.   But  Ky  seems  unable  to
pacify  his  own  hand-picked   Cabinet.   The  issue
in  the  Cabinet  crisis  is  as  if  ironically  made  to
order  for  the  purpose  of  illuminating  the  mythi-
cal   character   qf__o.nr   official   view   of   the   war.
Watch  closely.
Both  Sides  Northern  Led
The  "irreducible"  minimum of  U.S.  policy,  as
Bobby  Kennedy  himself  phrased  it  in  his  speech
last  February,  is  that   "we" will  not  turn   South
Vietnam  over  to  the  North."   But  six  southern
members   of   Ky's    Cabinet   are   threatening   to
resign  because  they  resent  Northern  domination.
"The  seven most powerful figures in Ky's  regime,"
Eichard  Critchfield  cabled  the  Washington  Star
(Oct.    16)  from   Saigon,   "are   all  refugees  from
North  Vietnam."   Five,  he  added,  including  Ky
himself,  are  graduates   of  North  Vietnam's  Nam
Dinh  Military  Academy.   In  supporting   the  Ky
regime   we  have  turned   the   South   over   to   a
Northern   dictatorship.
The  Cabinet  crisis  provides  a  sardonic   back-
ground  to  the  picture  Johnson  drew  on   leaving
for   Manila:   "A   small   Asian   nation   is   under
attack."  The  true  picture  emerging  is  of  a  small
Asian  nation  torn  in  two  between  two  rival  sets
of  Northern leaders, one in Hanoi  (where  several
arc  Southerners) and the other in Saigon.  Ameri-
can  power has been thrown behind one set against
the  other.   This  is  clearly  civil  war.
Johnson said in Hawaii that Asians "want, above
all,  to have  a  voice in their  own destiny."  But  the
South A
T
Jctnainese voices in the Cabinet crisis  have
of   the  Manila  Conference  .  .  .
Dedicated  to  the  Ft.  Hood  Three
"In  early   Christian  times  a  soldier,   Theodore,   told
the  authorities  that  being  a  Christian  he  could  not  bear
arms,  and  when  he  was  executed  for  this  the   respon-
sible  authorities  quite  sincerely  regarded  him as  a  mad-
man  and far  from trying  to  conceal  such  an  occurrence,
exposed   him  to  public  scorn  at  their  execution.     But
now  when  cases  of  refusals   of   military  service   occur
more  and  more  frequently,  these  cases  are  no  longer
regarded  by  the  authorities  as  madness,  but  as  a  very
dangerous   awakening  from  madness,  and  the  govern-
ments  far  from  holding  such  cases  up  to  public  scorn
carefully  conceal  them,  knowing  that  the  salvation  of
men  from  humiliation,  enslavement  and  ignorance,   will
come   about  not   by   revolutions,  trades-unions,   peace-
congresses,  and  books,  but  in  the  simplest  way  —  by
each  man  who  is  called  upon  to  share  in  the  infliction
of  violence  on  his  fellow  men  and  on  himself,  asking
in  perplexity:  'But  why  should  I  do  this?'"
—Tolstoy:  The  Kingdom  of  God Is  Within  You  (1893)
been  stilled  by  censorship.   Not  a  line  has  been
allowed  to  appear  about  it  in  Saigon's  gagged
press.   Somehow freedom  of  the  press  has  never
been included in the  freedom  we have been defend-
ing  all  these  years  in  South  Vietnam.
The  immediate  issue  behind the  crisis  was  the
arrest  of  a  Southern  sub-Cabinet  officer  by  Brig.
Gen.   Nguyen  Ngoc  Loan,  a  Northerner  who  is
head   of  both  police  and  military   security   and
thereby  perhaps   the  second  most  powerful  man
in  the  country.  Eleven  of the  12 Southern  civilian
members of the Cabinet protested  to Ky that  Loan
was trying  to  set up  a  police state.
Another  and  deeper  issue  seems  to  lie  behind
the  crisis.   My  first  clue  to  it  was  a  dispatch  in
Le   Figaro   (Oct.  11)  which  said   that   the   sub
Cabinet   officer  arrested  by  Gen.  Loan  had  been
accused   of  "manoeuvres   separatistes   sudistes."
(Southern  separatist  maneuvers.)  I  also  noticed
in  the  Saigon  Post   (Oct.  13)  that  Ky's   Armed
In  A  Speech  Few  Papers  Covered,  Fulbright  Asks  The  No.  1  Question  for  Americans
'The  question  for  Americans  today  is  whether  we  want
our  country   to  be  the  world's  policeman  or  an  intelligent
and  humane  society  whose  principal  contribution to  the  out-
side  world  has  been  the  power  of  its  example.   It  is  said
that  we  are  so  rich  and  strong  that  we  can  be  the   world's
policeman  and  build  the  Great  Society   at  the  same  time.
Things  certainly  are  not  working out  that  way.   The  89th
Congress  lost  interest   in  the  Great  Society  and  became  a
Var   Congress.'    On  Oct.  5  I  noticed  two  headlines.   One
said  'Rise  In  War  Cost  Reaches  A  Peak';  the  other, 'Senate
Passes  Anti-Poverty  Bill;  $746  Million  Cut.'    Since  we  do
not  feel  able  to  economize  on  military  expenditures  and  are
unwilling  to  reduce  spending on  such  a  life-and-death  mat-
ter  as  beating  the  Russians to  the  moon—at  a  cost  of  $20
to  $50  billion—we  are  requiring  the   poor  and  the   school-
children  of  America  to  pay  the  cost.
—Fulbright  at  Kansas  State
'The  inspiration  and  commitment  have  disappeared from
the  Great  Society,  not  only  because  of  pressures  on  our  ma-
terial,  but  also  for  lack  of  mental  and  spiritual,   resources.
Politicians,  like  other  people,  have  only  one  brain  apiece
and  it  stands   to  reason  that  if   they  spend  all  their  time
thinking  about  one  thing  they  are  not  going  to  be  thinking
about  something  else.    The  President  simply  cannot  think
about  implementing  the  Great  Society  at  home  while  he  is
supervising  bombing  missions over  North  Vietnam.   Just  as
there  is  something  unseemly  about  an  individual  carrying
all  the  burdens  of  the  Community  Chest, and  the  PTA  while
his  own  children  run  wild,  there  is  also  something unseemly
about  a  nation  conducting a  foreign  policy  that  involves  it
in  the   affairs   of   most  of   the  nations   in  the  world  while
its  cities  are  wracked by  violence,  its  streets   choked  with
traffic,   its  rivers open  sewers  and  its  air  unfit  to  breathe."
College  Oct. H    (Abridged)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  H, 1966
Enables  All  To  See  How   Clearly  This  is  a  Civil  War  In  Vietnam
Forces   Council  after   a  two-day  meeting   voted
unanimously  for  an  invasion  of  the  North  to  lib-
erate  "the  entire  country".   It  also  voted  not  to
accept  Communist  or  neutralist   elements  within
the  government.
What  the  "Separatists"  Want
Now  a  powerful  group   of  some  5,000  aristo-
cratic absentee  landlords in Saigon under  the lead-
ership  of  Tran  Van  Van,  who was  elected  to  the
Constituent Assembly, have been pursuing  a  politi-
cal  course  which is  diametrically  the  opposite  of
this.   They  want  peace  and  they  want  an  inde-
pendent  South  Vietnam.   They  talk  of  linking  it
economically  with  Japan,  and  they  hope  to  split
the   National  Liberation   Front.   "We   hope   to
appeal  to  its  middle class  wing,"  Tran  Van  Van
told  Critchfield  (Wash.  Star, Sept. 25).  "The  Lib-
eration  Front  is  a  front  of  Southerners   while
Hanoi   runs   things   from   behind,  just   like   the
Northerners  do in  Saigon."  Tran Van Van  added
that  "A\
7
ith  some of the  Catholics,  we are  working
to  get  these  people  in  the  NLF.  to  come back  on
condition  no  neo-colonialist  is  elected  as  Presi-
dent."  Neo-colonialist means  stooge  of the  Ameri-
cans  and  would  exclude  both  Ky  and  Thieu,  the
present   Chief  of  State.   This  program  begins  to
dovetail  with  the  offer  made  in  the  latest  inter-
view  Wilfred  Burchett  had  with  the  head  of  the
NLF,   which  is  ready  to  form   a  broadly   based
Soutli   Vietnamese   government,   excluding   only
"neo-colonialists"  like  Ky  and  Thieu.*
The "separatists" would end the  civil war,  form
a  coalition with  neutralist  if  not  Communist  ele-
ments,  throw  off  control  of  the  Northerners  in
Saigon,  end  the  ambition of  the  Ky  crowd  to con-
White  House  Fiction  Too  Much  Even  For  Ky
"Saigon,  Oct.  11—President  Johnson  recently  made
public   a   report   by   White   House   Assistant    Robert
Komer  telling of  'impressive'  progress  in  the  'rural  de-
velopment'  program—otherwise  known  as   pacification.
.  .  .  The  Ky  regime  is  operating  under  no  such  illu-
sions.    Ky  himself  recently  sent  top  officials  a  detailed
report. ...  It  admitted  corruption  .  .  .  and conceded
that   pacification   now   was   little   more   than   a   paper
program."
—R. H. Shackford,   Washington  Daily  News,  Oct. 11
quer  the  North  and  allow the  people  of the  South
in  Johnson's  words "to  shape  their  own destiny."
This  is  exactly  what  we  claim  to  be  fighting  for
but  needless  to say the U.S. is  on the other  side.
Whether  or  not  we support  Ky's dream  of  "lib-
erating"  the  North,  we  don't  want  any  kind  of
neutralist  regime in the  South.  Ky  with our back-
ing  will  be  able  to  crush  "separatism"  at  home
and  continue a  war  which  ho hopes  to  widen.  He
and  the  other Northern generals  resemble  Chiang
Kai-shek  in  hi.s  desire  to  regain  his  old  home on
the  mainland  in  that  older  and  bigger  Asian  civil
war.   Tf  we  brush  away  the   cobwebs  of  propa-
ganda,  we  can   sc«'  that  the  U.S.  has  committed
itself  to  one  side  in  a  Vietnamese  civil  war   as
it  has  to  one  side  in  the  Chinese  civil  war.   In
both  cases  the  civil  war  has  given us  a  means  of
establishing  bases  in  Asia,  one  offshore  in   For-
mosa,  the  other  on  the  mainland in Vietnam.
*  Secret   negotiations  may   be   underway.     Critchfield   re-
ported  in  the  same  dispatch,  "According  to  reliable  American
sources,  an  Under  Secretary  of  Hanoi's  Foreign  Ministry  did
actually  slip  into  Saigon  for  talks  a  few  months  ago,  though
no  one  will  admit  seeing him."
White  House  Fiction  and A  Congressional  Investigation  of  The  "Other  War"  in  Vietnam
"South  Vietnam  is  increasingly  coming  to  grips  with  the
need  to  modernize  its  society,  bolster  its  civil  economy,  de-
velop  its  representative institutions,   and  provide  a  better
life  for  its  people.  .  .  .  On  land  reform,  the  GVN  is  pro-
ceeding  with  distribution  of  1.2  million  acres.
"Our   efforts   will   not   end   when   Communist   aggression
ceases,   but   will   remain   as   the   foundation   of   a   modern
nation."
—Re-port   on  the  progress  since  Honolulu  in   the  "other
war"    in  Vietnam  by  R.  W.  Komer,  the  ex-CIA   -man  who  is
Johnson's  coordinator for   "pacification"    as  released  by   the
White  House  with  much  fanfare,   Sept.  13.
"Twelve  years  have  elapsed  since  we  began  contributing
economic  assistance and  manpower  to  South  Vietnam.    Yet
that   nation   continues   to   face   political   instability,   lack   a
sense  of  nationhood,  and  to  suffer  social,  religious  and  re-
gional   factionalism   and  severe   economic  dislocations.    In-
flation  continues  to  mount,  medical  care  remains  inadequate,
LAND  REFORM  IS  VIRTUALLY  NON-EXISTENT  [em-
phasis  added],  agricultural  and  education advances are min-
imal,   and  the   development   of   an  honest,  capable   and   re-
sponsible  civil  service  has  hardly begin."
—"Additional  views"  filed  by  Congressmen  Donald    Ifiims-
feld   (R.  Ill)   and  Robert  Dole  (R.  Kan)   to  the  report   Oft.
12  by  the  House  Foreign  Operations  Subcommittee   under
Chairman  John  E.  Moss   (D.  Cat)   on  the  waste  and    /<///«'»•-
age   in   the   V.S.   Assistance   program   in  Smith   Viilmnn.
The  three  Republican  minority   members  (including   Ogdrn
Reid  of  New   York,  sec  below)  felt  that  the  report   fulled   to
touch  on  "the  broader problem"  hi  South  Vietnam.
"Representatives  of   the   merchant   and   landowning fam-
ilies  arc  entrenched  in  various  strata  of  this  bureaucracy.
Under  present  circumstances,  their  position  is  so   .solidified
that   even  after   the   cessation   of   military   hostilities   they
may   be  able  to   prrpetnate   their   control.     If   this   is  per-
mitted  to  happen   .   .  .the  Vietnamese   imputation   will   have
little  opportunity  to  raise  their  standard  of   living."
—Additional  Turn's  (>/ 7?riJ  fu  Hir  House  rrpoH   ufoo-rc
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October  24, 1966
Johnson   Was  More  Fervent  About  Peace  in  1964  Than  Kennedy  in 1966
(Continued  from  Page  One)
"with  an  appeal  for  the  students  to  acknowledge
that  was a  subject separate  from  providing  relief
for   noncombatants  hurt  by  the  war." It  is  in-
decent  to  talk  of helping  the  refugees while keep-
ing  silent  about  the  napalm  and  the   saturation
bombings that make a hell  of their  lives.  He would
go  no further  than  to  say,  coyly,  "You  are  aware
that  I  have  some  reservations  about  our  role  in
Vietnam."   This  drew  the  biggest  applause  of  the
evening,  but  it  is  time  Kennedy  stopped   getting
cheers  for  such  tepid  observations.   The  students
cheered  because  they  were  hungry  for   a  word
against  the  war  and  because  they  had  faith  in
Kennedy.  But  he betrays  their  faith,  by  playing
skilful  politics  on  the  issue  that  may  mean  life
or  death  for  them.   We  are  glad  to  see  that  he
was  heckled  in  Chicago  and  met  with  signs say-
ing,  "Kennedy  and  Douglas  Support   Mass  Mur-
derers   in   Vietnam."   There,  too, in   the   same
equivocal vein as  at  Hunter, he said  he  "happened
to  have  some disagreements  with  President  John-
son  on  Vietnam."  (Wash.  Post,  Oct.  16). Is  he
saving  thorn  for'his memoirs?
What  Is  Kennedy's  Game?
Wm.  V.  Shannon  in  Harper's  for  October  says
he  is  out  for  the  Vice  Presidency  in  1968.   "With
skilful  publicity,"  Shannon  writes,  "this  could  be
made  to  appear  not  as  an  act  of  bold  usurpation
and  impatient  ambition  by  Kennedy but  a  reluc-
tant  rescue  mission  to  prop  up  an  aging wartime
President  whose  popularity  is  sagging."  Just  as
Johnson  moved  left  to  outflank  Goldwater,  with
whom  he  had  been  allied  in  the  Senate,  so  Ken-
nedy  moved left  to  outflank  Humphrey  and  take
over  the  latter's  liberal  constituency.  But  he  is
The  VC  Must  Be  Using  Our  Army   Manuals
"Saigon   (UPI)—Viet   Cong  guerrillas  used  civilians
as  human  shields to  escape  a  fight  with American  para-
troopers   today."         —Washington  Daily  News,  Oct. 13
"On entering  the  village.  .  .  .  Utilize  villagers  to  pre-
cede  the  entrance  of  troops."
—Advice   on   warfare    in   Vietnam.    Army   Digest,
August  1966,  P.  Sit.
We  also  note   that   this   same   article,  in  discussing
the  problem  of  ferreting   out  Vietcong  in  occupied vil-
lages,  says  "Training   must  be  conducted  to   overcome
the  inhibitions  that  the  average  American  has   about
violating   the  right   of  private  property.     They   should
be  trained  to  search   thoroughly   without   reservation."
We  hope   this   does  not  spark  an  investigation   of   the
Pentagon  by  the  Un-American  Activities   Committee.
careful  not  to  get  so far  out  as  to  break  his  ties
with  the  White  House.
We  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  Kennedy  is  in-
sincere.   We  only  note  that  the  liberal  views  he
has adopted also serve his political purposes.  Nor
do  we  mean  to  say  that  he  is  not  troubled  by
the  war.  We believe he is.  But  he is  not  troubled
enough  to  risk  a  confrontation with  Johnson.   In
a  Wall  St.  Journal   (Oct.  17)  survey  of   Bobby's
campaign activities one can see how little he  deals
with any concrete issues  in those tours which have
the  bobby-soxers squealing.  As  for  the  war,  that
paper   noted  "Actually   Mr.  Kennedy  has  been
careful   of  late   to   avoid  sharp   attacks   on  the
President.  When he expressed  doubts about  Viet-
nam  policy,  he  always  stresses   that   'these   are
very  complex  problems, with no simple solutions'."
Johnson was for  peace, too, before he won election.
AVhat  guarantee  that  Kennedy would  prove  any
better,  under  the  enormous  pressure  of  the  mili-
tary  bureaucracy,  if  his  convictions  are  already
so  feeble,  his  mind  so  divided!
We'll  Be Clod to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped   Addressed   Envelope
Also  PLEASE  Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers  Urgent
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington,  O.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Street   ...........................................................................
City   ....................................  Zip................  State.......
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name    ................................................................
Street   ..........................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State.......
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate  if   announcement  wished  Q
10/24/66
Fifties
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  B.C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  Monday  except  in   August,  the  last   week  in   December   and   the
first   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave.   N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published   and  edited
by   I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.     Subscription:   S5  in   the  U.S.:  $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall  rates:
Cl5  to  Europe;   920  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED