I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966apr11.pdf

============================================================

The  Truth  About  Plane  Losses  Over North  Vietnam,  P.  2
Still  Only  Two  Senators  Willing  To  Speak  Up
"If  there  is  such  a  thing as  a  civil  war  within  a civil war,     farcicality,  the  feebleness   and  the  bankruptcy  of   the  Ad-
it  surely  is  transpiring  today  in  South  Vietnam."                       ministration's  policy  in  Southeast   Asia  than  what  is  hap-
—Morse  (D., Oregon) on the Senate floor, April  5     pening  in  South  Vietnam."
''Nothing  could   more  completely  reveal  the  falsity,  the                   —Gruening  (D.,  Alaska)  on the Senate  floor,  April  5
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  14
APRIL  11,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
What  the  Vietnamese  People  Resent
What  are  ordinary  Vietnamese  people  thinking?  U.S.   press
dispatches  provide  no  clue  to  man-in-the-street  reactions.  They
carry  amazingly little  even  on  the  rebel  elements,   who  they
are  and  what  they  want.    The   faces  of   the   demonstrators,
faces  distorted  by  fury  and  exaltation,  appear  for  a  fitful  mo-
ment  on  our  TV  screens.    We  can  see  their  crudely  lettered
banners.    But  on  the  whole,  our  press—like  our  war  effort—
tends  to  treat  the  Vietnamese   people  as  irrelevant.     I  have
seen  few  interviews with  Buddhist  or  student  leaders.    Stray
bits  and   pieces  of  what  they  and   their  banners  say  can  be
gleaned  from  the  news  dispatches.  But  mostly  the  press  seems
to  look  on,  uncomprehendingly,  from  behind  the  barred  win-
dows  of  the  Caravelle  and  the  Continental  hotels  in   Saigon,
like  tourists gaping  at  a  spectacle.    We  get  not  so  much  what
the  discontented  are  saying,  as  how  this  is  interpreted   by  the
U.S.  intelligence  men  with  whom  the  reporters  are  in  contact.
These  interpretations  tend  to  be  as  distorted  as  the  cop's  view
is  everywhere,  whether  a  Southern  Sheriff's   of  a  civil  rights
demonstration  or  J.  Edgar  Hoover's of  the  student  peace  move-
ment.    The  common  characteristic  is  to  overlook   the  obvious
grievance  and  search   for  some  diabolic   conspiracy.
Most  Ancient   of  Such   Complaints
If   you  read   the   dispatches   closely   and   with   sympathetic
eye  you can  feel  the  anguish  of  the  Vietnamese  people.  Amer-
ican  GI's  "have  turned  our  women   into  prostitutes   and  bar
girls"  UPI  quoted  an  unnamed  speaker  at  a  Buddhist  student
rally  in  Saigon  (Wash.  Daily  News,  March  31).    This  is  the
oldest  and  truest  complaint  about  occupation  troops  from  time
immemorial.    Another  speaker  at  the  same  rally  charged   that
his  homeland  was  being  used  as  "a  testing  ground   for  weap-
ons  of  foreign  countries."     You  only  have  to  skim  through
Aviation   Week   or  the  latest  military  appropriations   hearings
to  see that  Vietnam,  like  Spain  a generation  ago,  is being  used
as  a  huge  proving  ground,  with  the  Vietnamese  people  as  the
guinea  pigs.    We  seem  to  find  it  strange  that  they  can  speak,
and  unlike  the  mice  and  rabbits  in  our  laboratories   cry  out
against  their  vivisection.    A  third,  equally  natural  and  justi-
fiable complaint,  was made  by the  Buddhist  newspaper, Father-
land.    Walter  Friedenberg  of  Scripps-Howard,  reported   from
Saigon  (Wash.  Daily  News,  March  22)  it  had  protested  that
" 'the  arrival  of  more  than  200,000   foreign  troops  has  upset
the  life  of  the  population',"  bringing  inflation  and   plunging
the  populace   into  misery."     There   must  be  broad   strata  of
the  uncommitted  urban  population  which  feel  that  the  Amer-
General  In  A  Dream   World
Mr. DOWNS (ABC News): Gen. Greene,  the  Marines,
and  you  yourself,  have  been  very  proud of  civic  action
and  the  pacification  program,  the  Marines  working with
the  civilians  in  South Vietnam.   How  come  you  haven't
been  able  to  pacify Danang?
Gen.   GREENE  (Commandant,  U.S.  Marines):  Well,
I  feel  that  Danang  is  pacified.  .  .  .
Mr.  DOWNS: ...  We put  in  planes  and  B-52  bomb-
ers,  we  defoliate  their  agricultural  lands  sometimes,  we
kill  civilians  though  we  don't  want  to.  ...      How can
they  like  us?    How can  we  pacify  them?
Gen.   GREENE: Of  course  this  is  a  problem  we  have
to  face  in  any  campaign.  .  .  .
Mr.   DOWNS:  Aren't   you  talking   about   a  sort  of
occupation?    Is  that  what  it  is  going  to  come  to?
Gen.   GREENE: It  is  not  an  occupation  in  any  sense
of  the  word  because  we  have no  selfish  aims  of  our  own
in  there  and the  people realize  this.  .  .  .  The longer  we
stay  there  the  more  the  people  understand  this.
—ABC-TV  Issues  and Answers, April 3
ican  cure  is  worse  than  the  Communist  disease.
All  the  cliches  we  claim  to  be  defending  in  South  Vietnam
fill our  people with  alarm when  we are  asked  to put  them  into
practice.    Nothing  seems  to  be  so  suspect  as  the  demand   for
self-government.     "Some  of  the  shouts  by  Buddhist   demon-
strators,"  we are warned  by Rowland Evans and  Robert  Novak,
always  alert   to  Communist  conspiracy   (New    York   Herald-
Tribune,  April  5),   "are  straight  out  of  die  Viet  Cong  slogan
book."    They  even  cited  one  "high-ranking   official"  who  be-
lieves  the  Buddhist  demonstrations  are  part  of  a   world-wide
strategy  timed  with  the  peace  rallies  of  March  27!   The  main
speaker  at  the  Buddhist  rally  in  Saigon  that  day  sounded   more
like  an  echo  of  1776  than  of  1917.    "This  government   is  not
a  government  of  the  people,"  the  Rev.  Thien  Minh,  head  of
Buddhist   youth    affairs    complained    (AP    from    Saigon    in
Washington   Star,  March  27).     "We  are  not  free  to  act,  no
interests  guaranteed.    They  want  to  put  in  jail  anybody  they
want,  to  execute  anybody  they  want.    All  the  political  groups
are   paralyzed."     Even  the   two   extreme   right-wing   parties,
the  Dai  Viet  and  the  NQQVD,  which  were  allowed  to  oper-
ate  for  a  time  after  Diem  fell,  have  disappeared.   Two  of  the
banners  carried  by  the  Buddhist  boy  scouts   in  the  April   1
demonstrations  were  "Down  With  the  American  Attempt  of
Objecting  to  the  Forming  of  A  Vietnamese   Assembly"   and
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  11,1966
Hiding  Heavy  Toll  in  Planes  and  Pilots  Because  The  Bombings  Are  Uneconomic?
Time  the  Pentagon  Told  the  Truth  About  Air  Losses  Over  North  Vietnam
We  found  our  anti-brass hat  hackles  rising when  we  read  in
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force  Harold   Brown's  statement  to  the
Senate  Armed  Services  and  Appropriations  committees  March
31  that  while  the  number  of  strike  sorties  flown  each  month
over  Vietnam  "is  about  the  same  as  at  the  peak  of  the  Ko-
rean  war,"  the  "overall  aircraft  loss  in  Southeast  Asia,  includ-
ing  action  in  both  North  and  South  Vietnam, is slightly  lower
than  it  was  in  Korea."     This  struck  us  as  another   of   those
Pentagon   efforts   to  hide  the   fact  that  our  losses  over  North
Vietnam  are  running  far  higher  than  in  Korea.
The  Tricky  Language  of  A  Shyster  Lawyer
The  Brown  statement  has  to  be  studied  as  one  would  the
words   of   a  shyster  lawyer.    Notice   first   that   he   spoke   of
"overall"   loss  and  secondly  that  the   "overall"   included  not
just North  and  South  Vietnam  but  all  of  Southeast  Asia.    The
guerrillas  in  South  Vietnam  have  little  anti-aircraft  and   there
are  other  areas,  as  in  Laos  and  Thailand,  where  even  less  is
encountered.    By  lumping  losses  elsewhere  in  -Southeast  Asia
with North  Vietnam, the high  rate in the North  can be  hidden.
Just  how  high  the  rate  is  may  be  uncovered  with  a  little
study  and  patience,  despite  Pentagon  censorship  of  these  hear-
ings.    At  page  338  of  the  supplemental Vietnam budget  hear-
ings  held  last  January  by  these  two  Senate  committees,  Secre-
tary  McNamara  under  questioning  by  Young  of   Ohio   said
we  had  lost  190  planes  over  North  Vietnam,  though  this fig-
ure   included   "aircraft   destroyed   other   than   through   direct
hostile  action"  (our  emphasis).    He  did  not  explain  what  he
meant  by  "direct"   hostile  action  but  added   "the   number  of
aircraft  shot  down  is on  the order  I  think of  135.  . .  ."  (There
must  be  something  disingenuous  in  the  wording  because  sev-
eral   days  earlier  in  the  same  hearings  (p.   118)    McNamara
said  we  had  lost  179  planes,  11  to  surface-to-air missiles,  and
168  to  anti-aircraft  fire.)  Even  using  the  lower  figure  of   135,
the  loss  ratio  is  startling.    McNamara  did   not  give  the  loss
ratio  but  this  can  now  be  estimated  if  we  turn   back  to  Air
Secretary  Brown's  latest  statement  and  notice  that  he  said  we
had  flown  "more  than  10,000  strike  sorties"  over  North  Viet-
nam.     This  would  give  us  a  ratio  of  about  13.5  planes   lost
per   1,000  sorties  or  almost  four  times  the  Korean  rate,  which
was  3.5  per   1,000.
One  reason  for  hiding  these  figures,  we  suspect,  is  because
(he  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  is  highly  uneconomic.    Mc-
Namara,  under  questioning by  Young,   said  only  about  half
the  crews  shot  down  were  recovered  and  that  the  cost  of  the
aircraft   lost  ran  between  $300  and   $350  millions.    Senator
Symington  at  the  same  hearings  questioned  the  value  of   the
NEC  Blacks  Out  LBJ's  Credibility Gap
On  Friday,  April  1,  NBC  took  a  quarter   page  ad  in
the  New  York  Times  to  announce  an  hour  TV-cast   that
night  on  Vietnam:  The  Home  Front.    A  main   feature
of  the  show  was  to  be  an  analysis,  "How  do  Americans
really   feel   about   the   war   in  Vietnam?"     NBC   hired
National   Analysts,  Inc.,  of   Philadelphia,  to  conduct   a
poll  and  an  advance  press  release  was  sent  out.    But
that  night  the  poll  was  not  used,  and  NBC  has  since  re-
fused  to  let  us  see  the  results  or  even  the  press  release.
Fortunately   the   main   results   were   published   by   the
Washington  Post  Saturday,  April  2.    The  poll   showed
62.4%   satisfied  with  how  the   President   was   handling
the  situation,  and  70.7%  thought  he  was  "doing  enough
to   achieve   peace."     75.3%  also   thought   the   problem
should  be  handled  by  the  UN.    The  unpalatable   result
for  the  White  House  came  in  response  to  a  key  ques-
tion:   59.6%   said   "No"   and   only   21.8%   said     "Yes"
when  asked   "Has   the  White  House   been   giving  us  all
the  truth  about  Vietnam?"    Some  here  in   Washington
are  wondering  whether  ex-NBC  executive  Robert   Kint-
ner's  first  White  House  chore  was  keeping  that  off  the
TV  screens.    NBC  spokesmen   said  the  decision   to  cut
was   "intra-mural."     "We   did   spend   a   good   deal   of
money ...  in  excess  of   $15,000   (on  the  poll),"  the
show's   producer  Chet  Hagen  told  the  Washington  Post
(April  3).    "I  understand  they're  talking  now  of  trying
to  fit  it  into  some   other   show."
bombings  and  spoke  of  one  bridge  which  had  been   attacked
unsuccessfully  five  times;  two-thirds  of  the  pilots  shot  down
were  lost.     Symington   asked   Air   Force   Chief   of   Staff   Mc-
Connell  to  furnish  the  committee  "the  cost  of  the  airplanes  in
question  and  the  estimated  costs,   aside  from   the   tragedy  of
the  loss of  life,  the  estimated  loss  in training of  the  pilot.  . .  ."
The   information  was  furnished  but  classified.
Symington   commented   that  on   a  recent   trip   to   Vietnam
certain  people  told  him   (closer  identification was  deleted  by
the  censor)   "We  don't  see  why  we  have  to  waste  men  and
planes,  multi-million  dollar  planes,  trying  to  knock  out  bar-
racks,  buses  or  even  ox-carts  as  targets."    General  McConnell
(p.   326)   admitted  it  was  "not   a  very  economical  use  of  air-
power  to  do  that  kind  of  bombing.    But  with  the  intelligence
that  we get  on  an  operation  such  as you have  described,  if  they
tell  us  that  there  is  a  target  there,  then  I  think  it  is  essential
that  we go  and  try to get  it."  Then  the  General  added,    "Now,
naturally,  there  will  be  times  when  there  won't   be  anything
there  at  all,  but  I  believe that  we  will  have  to  continue  that
kind  of  bombing."     Is  this  rational  strategy  or  the  mindless
momentum  of  a  huge  military  machine?
This  Should Be  Good  for  a  Few  Guffaws  in Brazil, the  Dominican Republic and Guatemala
change   simply  because  they   wish   to  preserve   the   benefits
they  derive  from  maintenance  of  the  status  quo.   There  are
also  those  groups  which  see  a  chance  to  seize  power  in  the
atmosphere  of  dissatisfaction   and  unrest. ...  It  is  for  this
reason   that   our   Military  Assistance   Program   for   Latin
America  continues  to  be  oriented   toward  internal   security
.  .  .  not  directed  at  eliminating  protest   or  enforcing   con-
formity   but  rather   at   helping   provide  an  environment   in
"Change  is  a  traditional  feature  of  Latin  American  poli-
tics,  and  in  recent  years  it  has  been  the  military  establish-
ment   which   in   many  instances   has   provided  the   greatest
stabilizing  factor  for  orderly  change  and  continuity  of  con-
stitutional   government."
—Joint   Chiefs    of   Staff    Gen.  Wheeler   before   House   For-
eign.  Affairs     on  military  assistance  March  30.
"Our    major  objective  in  Latin  America  is  economic  and
social   development.  .  .  .  There   are   groups   which   oppose
which  economic  and  social  tasks  can  be  effectively  pursued."
—Secretary  McNamara  same  committee, same  day
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  11, 1966
Adam  Clayton  Powell  Finally  Produces—But  Will  He  Deliver?
A  10-Point  Poverty  Program Which  Begins  to  Measure  Up  to  Need
By  Adam  Clayton   Powell*
The  Federal  Crusade Against  Poverty is  too  small  with  too
few   dollars  to  help  so  many.    While   America  spends  un-
countable  billions  of   dollars  to  pursue  a  victoryless  war  on
foreign   soil,  we  are  shortchanging  our  own   citizens  with  a
heartless  stinginess  that  bars  them  from   a  triumph  over  their
own  war  on  poverty.
Powell's  10  Point   Plan
It  is  from   these  destitute  brothers  and   sisters  that  I  seek
support  for  this  10  point  program:  I  shall  amend  the  Eco-
nomic  Opportunity Act  of  1964  to  provide $7  billion  for  anti-
poverty  programs  this  year.    Several  distinguished  economists
and  authorities on  poverty  have  indicated  that  $7   billion  is
the  minimum  to  make  the  barest  impact  on  poverty in  Amer-
ica.    Based  on  this  $7  billion  budget  I  shall  seek  to  expand
the  community action  programs  of   this  country  by  doubling
the  money allocated  for  them.    I  wish  to  emphasize  that  this
strengthening  of  CAPs  will  in  no  way  detract  from  the  main
thrust  of  the  1966  amendments—job  creation  and  on  the  job
training.     To   prevent  local   officials   from   emasculating  the
anti-poverty  programs  to  preserve  their  selfish  political inter-
ests,  I  shall  offer  an  amendment  that  unequivocably  bars  any
use  of   the  veto  power  over  any  CAPs  by  any  Mayor,  city
council  or  local  governing  body.    To  insure  the development
of  independent  anti-poverty programs,  I  have  introduced  an
amendment  that  requires that  40%   of  all  money  allocated by
OEO  go  to  independent programs  or  programs which  are  not
a  component  of  or  controlled  by  existing  community-wide  or
"umbrella"  agencies.    A  new  section to  Title  II  will  be  added
to  specifically  provide  for  the  funding  of  a Narcotics Rehabili-
tation  and  Prevention  program.    Five  million  dollars  will  be
allocated  for  this  section.
I  shall   offer   with  particular  pleasure  an  amendment   that
completely  abrogates  OEO's  administrative  right  to prescribe
Poor  Showcase   For   Democracy
Far  be  it  from  us  to  disturb  the  romantic   euphoria
of  Prime  Minister  Indira  Gandhi's  visit  to  Washington.
But   in   all   objectivity   it   should   be  noted   that   Asia's
biggest  "bulwark  of  democracy"  has  a  very  poor  record
indeed  when  compared  to  its,  and  our,  rival  Communist
China.    China   managed   to  emerge   from  terrible   years
of   drought   by  its   own  efforts,  without  either   U.S.   or
Russian  aid.  Strict  rationing   prevented  famine.  Peking
has  been  able  to  run  a  small  foreign  aid  program  of  its
own,  to  make  the  atomic  bomb  and  to  achieve  consider-
able  development.   In  the  present  Indian  food  crisis,  as
in  every   one  we  can  remember   back  to  that  in   World
War  II,  a  major   factor   has   been   the   inability   of   the
Indians   to   curb   their   own   speculators   and   hoarders.
Behind  the  facade  of  democracy   in  India  there  operates
an  Oriental   capitalist  class  of   merchants  and  usurers
quite  content  with  the  human  misery  and  squalor  from
which  it  profits.    It's  a  delusion   to  think  this   archaic,
badly   organized    and   decayed    society   can   provide   a
showcase  for   democracy   in  Asia.     On  the  contrary   it
can  only  discredit  democracy  in  the  eyes  of  a  new   gen-
eration  impatient  with  old  evils  and  permanent   hunger.
*At  a  poorly  reported  press  conference  March  30.
any  kind  of   loyalty  or  security  tests  based  upon   any  set  of
spuriously  collected  files  in  a  Federal,  state  or  local  agency.
I  intend  to  offer  an  amendment to  the  minimum  wage  bill  on
the  House  floor  that  raises  the  minimum  wage  to  $1.75   in
1969  and  to  $2.00  in  1970.    I  shall  also  introduce legislation
reducing  the  40  hour  work  week  in  a  gradual  declension  to
32  hours  a  week  over  the  next  six  years.    Because poverty  is
a  direct  function  of  educational  attainment  and  by  definition,
the  quality  of  education,  I  shall  begin  cross  country  hearings
in  Northern  ghettoes  to  gather  legislative  information  for  the
de   facto  school  segregation  bill   I   introduced   February  24.
This  country  cannot  long  continue  to  raise  the  hopes  of  the
impoverished  masses,  particularly  deprived  black  families,  and
not  expect  violent  repercussions  when  we  fail   to  fulfill  their
expectations.    Time   is  running   out   in   America   as   it   is   in
Vietnam.
A  First  Amendment Victory Which Is Still  A  Long  Way  From  Jeffersonianism
We  hope  the  Supreme   Court's  decision   in  the   DeGregory
case  will  finally  end  the  12  years  of  political  persecution   to
which  Hugh  DeGregory   has  been  subjected  by  the  State  of
New  Hampshire.    Back  in  1940,  DeGregory  ran  for  I,t. Gov-
ernor   of   Massachusetts    on   the   Communist   party    ticket.
Later  he   moved  to  New   Hampshire   where   his   past   made
him   fair  game  when   Louis  Wyman,  its   Attorney   General
and  a  pillar  of  the  China  Lobby,  launched  a  witch  hunt  in
the  early   50s.     In  the  first  DeGregory   case  to  reach   the
Supreme  Court,  DeGregory  had  refused  to  answer  questions
on   the   ground   that   the   immunity   offered   him   was   from
State  prosecution  only.    With  Warren,   Black  and  Douglas
noting  their  dissent,  the  Court  dismissed  the  appeal  in  1959.
Wyman,  for  some  reason,  dropped  the  proceeding  and  start-
ed  a  new  one.     When  this  reached   the   Supreme   Court   in
1961,  judgment  against  DeGregory  was  affirmed  per  curiam
with  Warren,  Black,  Douglas   and  Brennan  noting   dissent.
This   time  DeGregory   said   under   oath   that   he   was   "not
now"  a  member of  the  Communist  party  and  indeed  had  not
even  been  aware  of  the  existence  of  any  Communist   Party
in  New  Hampshire  in  the  six  and  a  half  years  since  the  law
under  which  he  was  being  questioned  had  been  enacted.    A
State  judge   thereupon    declared   him   purged   of    contempt,
and  a  new  Attorney  General  then  began  a  third  proceeding.
This  was  an  attempt  to  get  answers  from  DeGregory  on  his
knowledge   of  Communist  activities  prior  to   1957.    He  re-
fused  to  answer  on  First  Amendment   grounds  and  was   sen-
tenced  to  one  year  in jail.  This  time Clark  and  Fortas  joined
the  four  dissenters   of  1961  and  set  him  free.    "The  present
record,"   the   Court   said,   "is   devoid   of   any   evidence   that
there  is  any  Communist  movement  in  New  Hampshire  .  .  .
New  Hampshire's  interest  on  this  record  is  too  remote  and
conjectural  to  override  the  guarantee  of  the  First   Amend-
ment.  " Grateful  as  we  are  for  this  long  overdue   decision,
it  is  still  a  long   way  from  free  society  standards.    It  im-
plies  the  witch hunt  would  be  valid  despite  the  First  Amend-
ment  if  there  were  evidence  of  Communist  party  activities.
But   DeGregory   and   his   lawyer,   Howard   S.   Whiteside   of
Boston  are  to  be  congratulated  on  a  victory  which  to  some
extent   aflirms  the   First    Amendment.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  11,1966
We  May Widen  The  War  Rather  Than  Risk  A  Neutralist  Regime
(Continued   from   Page   One)
"Fundamental  Institutions  for   A  True  Democracy  Must  Be
Established  Soon."    We  wonder  whether  Evans  and  Novak
can  find  these  in  their  Viet  Cong  slogan   book.     The  most
touching  news  out  of  that  demonstration  was  the  call  for  a
"Self-Respect  Week,"  urging  children  to  stop  asking  Amer-
icans  for  money  (Wash.  Post.,  April  2).    Maybe  all  this  is
a  subtle  Communist  plot.    It  could  conceivably  be  the  reac-
tion  of   an  outraged   nationalism,  seeking  the   restoration  of
dignity  and   the  achievement  of   freedom  from  military  dic-
tatorship.
Distrusted  Allies
We  fear  the  people  we  claim  to  be  defending.    A  signifi-
cant  detail  was  reported   in  passing  by  Richard  Critchfield   in
the  Washington  Star  April  '5  during  the  height  of  the  Saigon
demonstrations.    "Tribal  mercenaries,"  he  cabled,  "ringed  the
American  Embassy."    We  didn't  even  trust  Ky's  troops,  we
had  to  fall  back  on  non-Vietnamese  hirelings  to  protect  our
Embassy.    Marshall  Ky  may  be  a  bit  of  a  clown  but  his  in-
stinct  seems  to  have  been  better  than  that  of  the  American
Embassy;  apparently  he  had  been  urged  by the  Embassy  to  get
tough  with  the  demonstrations  but  at  first  held  back  "for  fear
of   creating  martyrs."    This  explains  why  we  could   hardly
refuse  him  the  use  of  U.S.  transports  and  the  U.S.  air  base  at
Danang   when  Ky  finally  set  out  to  conquer   the   rebellious
North  and  shoot  the  Mayor  of  Danang.     (Ky  seems  to  think
all  problems  can  be  solved  by  shooting  somebody.)     In   the
wake  of  his  inglorious  backdown,  it  should  not  escape  atten-
tion  that  our  troops  were  all  ready  to  take  part  in  this  civil
war  within  a  civil  war.     "Thousands   of   U.S.   Marines   and
loyal   Vietnamese   troops,"   the   AP   reported   from   Danang
(Baltimore  Sun,  April  6)  "were  aligned  in  combat  readiness."
The  Vietnamese  commanders  seem  to  have  had  better   sense
than  their  American  advisers.    Ambassador  Lodge  and  Presi-
dent  Johnson  were  ready  to  back  Ky  to  the  last.
An  index  of  how  far  we  are  divorced  from  political  reali-
ties  was  provided  by  a  UPI  interview  with  the  Rev.  Hoang
Quynh,  chairman of  the  Catholic  Greater  Unity  Force.  Father
Quynh  is  the  all-out  anti-Communist who  played  a  key  role
Practically  Indistinguishable   From   Christians
"Mindful  of  the  violence  that  accompanied  the mainly
Buddhist  demonstrations   that  led  to  the  fall  of  Diem's
regime   and  his  assassination   in  '1963,   the   specialists
here  [in  Washington]   were  not  disposed  to  express  sur-
prise   about   reports  of   'sticks  and  steel  spikes'   being
carried  today   by  demonstrators   who  marched  from  a
Buddhist   institute   to   Saigon's   center.     There   were,
however,  some  ironic comments  on  the  contrast  between
such   behavior  by   ostensible    Buddhists   and  the   basic
tenets  of   Buddhism,  including  in  particular  its   'harm
no  living  creature'."
—Paul  Ward  m  the Baltimore  Sun,  April  3
Reminds  us of that  other  pacifist  sect which is taught
to  "love  thine  enemy"  and  does  it  with  napalm.
in  overturning   the  civilian  government   of  Dr.  Quat  last  June
and  bringing  to  power  the  Ky  dictatorship.   He  told  the  UPI
(Wash.   Post,   March   27)    that   Ky's   rule   was  worse  than
Diem's.    "There  are  so  many  things  wrong  with  the  govern-
ment,"  Father   Quynh   told   the  UPI,   "it   is  very  difficult   to
know  where  to  begin  to  criticize  it."    This  is  the  regime  we
were  prepared   to—and  may  yet—support  with  military  force.
This  is  the  regime  we  have  been  selling  to  ourselves  as  one
which  could  bring  about-  social  and  economic  reform.    Our
South  Vietnamese policy  continues  to  be  an  exercise  in  reso-
lute  self-delusion.
Insofar  as  it  is  possible to  see from  a  distance,  the  Buddhist
majority  may  well  fear  that  if  the  U.S.  should  go  to  the  nego-
tiating  table,  there  will  be  no  organized  political  force  on  the
non-Communist  side.    Free  elections  in  the  area  under  our
control,   a   representative  and   legitimate  government,   would
make  possible  negotiations   with  the  NLF   on  some  basis  of
equality.    In  Burma  and  Ceylon  the  Buddhists  have  erected
viable   neutralist   regimes   enjoying   friendly    relations   with
China.    They  may  hope  for  something  similar  in  South  Viet-
nam.   What  the  U.S.  fears  is  that  any  popular  regime  in  our
area  will  opt  for   a  negotiated   peace   and  a  neutralist   solu-
tion.    This  would  end  the  torment  of  the  Vietnamese   people
but  we  would  see it'as  a  political  defeat.    Rather  than  accept
it,  we  may widen  the  war.                                 Noon,  April  6
Index  for   1965   Ready  —   Send  Stamped  Addreued   Envelope  —   Renew  Your  Sub and  Send  A  Gift  Sub at  the  Same  Time
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
4/11/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  §ub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Ft/tie*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Clan  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except  in  August,   the  last  week  in   December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   15   in   the   U.S.;     $6   in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED