I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966dec05.pdf

============================================================

Johnson's  1964 Campaign  Duplicity  Newly  Exposed,  Pps.  2-3
Once  Our Military  Has  Counted  Them  Dead,  The  Least  They  Could  Do  Is  Fall  Over
"Once  Hanoi  understands  that  it  cannot  win,   the  Wash-
ington  theory  holds,  it  is  bound  to  recall  its   forces.  .  .  .
That  same  information  is  read  in  Saigon  against  abundant
evidence  that  the  North  Vietnamese  forces  continue  to  seek
offensive   positions;  that  they  do  not  divulge  to  Hanoi  and
may  not  even  believe  that  they  have  been  hurt  as  much  as
the  American  command  thinks  it  has  hurt  them."
—Max  Frankel  from  Saigon, New York  Times, Nov.  23.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,   NO.  39December  5,   1966
«"      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
The  Arab  Challenge  To  Jewish  Magnanimity
"Violence   breeds   violence.  .  .  .  This   large-scale  military
action  cannot  be  justified,  explained   away  or  excused  by  the
incidents  which  preceded  it.  ...     This  is  not  a  new  attitude
on   the  part   of   my  Government.     My  government  has  ex-
pressed  itself  about  retaliatory  raids  in  the  past."    The  senti-
ment   was   unexceptionable.     The   speaker   was   Ambassador
Goldberg.     The   occasion   was  the   meeting   of   the   Security
Council  to  hear  Jordan's   complaint  against  Israel.    The  very
same  words  apply  to  the  U.S.   bombings  of  North   Vietnam.
Not  a  single  one  of  the  great  Powers  which  condemned. Israel
for  its  reprisal  raid  into  Jordan  has  failed  to  take  the  law  into
its  own  hands  when  it  felt  its  national  interest  at  stake.    The
most  melodramatic  occasion  was  in  1956  when  the  Soviet  Un-
ion  sent  troops  into  Hungary,  and  kidnapped  and  murdered
its  Prime  Minister,  Nagy,  after  he  had  the  temerity  to  ask  the
United  Nations   to  safeguard   its  newly  declared  neutrality.
The  U.S.,  as  Mr.  Goldberg  said,  has  made  its  opposition   to
reprisals  known,  but  only  when  committed  by others.    It  con-
demned  France  for  its  reprisal  raid  into  Tunisia  in  1958  and
disapproved   of  Britain's  reprisal   raid  into  Yemen   in    1963.
71 Attacks  in  2  Years
Yet  Israel  is  not  trying  to  hold  an  empire.    Its  people  are
defending  their  homes.    "There  have  been  71  such  attacks
since  January  1965,"  Israel's  representative,   Michael  Comay,
told  the  Security Council  on  Nov.  16,  "partly  across  the  Syrian
border   and  partly  across  the   borders   of   neighboring   Arab
states."    There  have  been   dozens  of   attacks,  including  the
dynamiting  of  apartment  houses  within  the  city  of  Jerusalem
itself.    Israel's  danger,  Mr.  Comay  said,  lies  in  "the   organi-
zation,  training and  use of  para-military guerrilla  and  terrorist
forces,  designed  to  operate  in  Israeli  territory  in  advance of  a
future  military  showdown  with  regular  forces."    In  his  sup-
port  Mr.  Comay was able  to  quote  the  UN  Secretary  General's
latest  report  (Sept.  1)  on  the  UN  Emergency  Forces  in  which
he  expressed  concern  over  Egyptian  recruitment  and  training
of  a  12,000-man  "Liberation   Army"  in  the  Gaza  strip.
But   Israel  cannot  find  peace  by  behaving   in  the  Middle
East  as  if  it  were  the  American Wild  West  of  a  century  ago.
Reprisal  is abhorrent,  it  punishes  the  innocent with  the  guilty.
The  predictable  effect  has  been  to  inflame  enmity  in  a  fresh
spiral  of  hatred.    The  Arab  demonstrations  in  the  West  bank
Jordanian  cities  underscore  the  political  folly  of  the  raid.  For
Jordan  is  the  only  Arab  State  which  benefitted  from  the  crea-
A  Hopeless  War?
"The  war  against  the  guerrillas  in  the  countryside
has  not  yet  really  begun.  .  .  .  The influence  of  the   Sai-
gon  government  seems  not  to  grow  at  all.  .  .  .  Some
Americans  insist  there  is  less  effective  presence  in  the
villages  now  than  there  was  three  years  ago.  .  .  . The
pacification  program ...  all  but fell  on its  face  in   1966.
. . .  Real  domestic  output  has been  going  down  steadily.
...  Ravages of  war are one reason,  dislocation  of  peas-
ants  is  another.  .  .  .  One of  every  six  military  men
desert  in  the  course  of  a  year.  .  .  .  The Viet  Cong   con-
tinue  to  levy  taxes  of  one  form  or  another  in  every
Province  in  South  Vietnam,  including  Saigon.  .  .  .   Sai-
gon's  land  reform  program  .  .  .  has  never  really  been
put  in  motion.    In  the  secure  areas,  tenant  farmers—
that  means  70%  of  all  farmers  in  the  Delta—still  are
forced  to  pay  up  to  50%  and  more  of  their  rice  crop  to
absentee  landlords. ...  A  law on  the  books  since   1955
sets  the  limit  at  25%."
—"Vietnam.—A   Hopeless   War?"   a   10-page   special
report  in  U.S.   News  & World  Report,  Dec.  5.
1   S
tion  of  a  Jewish   state  in  Palestine,  and  Jordan  is  the  only
Arab  state  which  will  lose  if  Israel  is  destroyed.   The  original
UN  partition  plan,  as  voted  19  years  ago,  called  for  the  crea-
tion  of  twin  Arab  and  Jewish  states  in  the  territory  of  Pales-
tine.   The  Arab states,  in  defiance  of  the  UN  decisions,  began
to  send  their  troops  into  Palestine  to  destroy  the  Jewish  State
even  before  the  plan  could  take  effect  the  following  May.    In
the  expectation   that  the  Jewish  communities  would  be  over-
whelmed,  no  steps  were  taken  to set up  an  Arab  State.   When
the  Arabs  were  defeated,  Jordan  annexed  the  lands  and  peo-
ples  on  the  West  bank  of  the  Jordan  which  would  have  been
the  heart  of  Arab  Palestine.    These  are  the  lands  Jordan  will
lose  should  an  Arab  Palestine  be  established.    The  more  ad-
vanced   Palestinians   have  long  resented   rule   by  this   desert
monarchy.    This  is  the  most  precarious  Arab  regime  in  the
Middle  East,  the  one  which  has  been  most  cooperative  with
the  UN  truce  commission.    If  the  consequences  are  to  topple
this  regime,  the  result  may  be  a  chain  reaction  of  instability
in   this   most   dangerous   area   of   Soviet-American   rivalry.
Arab  oil  is  far   more   important   to   U.S.   interests  than   the
"face"   our  military  bureaucracy  would   lose  by  a   negotiated
peace  in  Vietnam  and  the  focus  of  world  tension  could  shift
overnight.
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December 5, 1966
Now  We  Learn  Bombers  Were  Being  Ordered  to  Thailand  and  Combat Troops  Readied
While  Johnson  Was  Making  Those  "No  Wider  War"   Speeches  in   1964
There  were  two  important revelations  in  the  censored  tran-
script  of   the  Tonkin  Bay  resolution  hearing  finally  released
on  Thanksgiving Day   (when   fewer   people  read  the   papers
and  it  would  attract  a  minimum  of  attention).    The  first  lay
in  the  anxiety  of  the  State  and  Defense  Departments  to  cen-
sor  out  not  only  answers  but  questions  bearing  on  the  events
which  set  off  what  Secretary  McNamara  called  "the   unpro-
voked  and   deliberate  attacks"   on   U.S.   destroyers  off  North
Vietnam  on  August  2  and  4,    1964.
How  to  Elude  the   Censor
On   the  opposite  page,   readers   will  see  how  the   censor's
blanks  can  be  filled  in   from   the   Senate  speeches   made  by
Senator  Morse  on  August  5  and  6,   1964.     We  can  thus  see
that  the  attacks,  far  from  being  deliberate  and   unprovoked,
followed  attacks on  North  Vietnamese coastal  islands by  South
Vietnamese  naval  vessels  under  the  watchful  eye  of  our  own
naval  vessels  inside  the  North  Vietnamese   12-mile  limit.
The  more  important  revelation  lies  in  McNamara's  secret
report  on  Aug.  6,  1964,  now  released  for  the  first  time.  This
shows   (see  box  below)   that  under  cover  of  this  attack,   the
Administration   took   far-reaching  steps   to   escalate  the  war.
fighter-bomber   aircraft    were  ordered  into   Thailand   whence
they  were soon  io  be  ordered  to  bomb  North  Vietnam.  Army
and  Marine forces  were  alerted  for  movement  to  South  Viet-
nam  where  hitherto we  had  not  had  combat  troops.
Some  of  the  bombers  and  combat  troops  must  have  already
reached  their battle  stations  when  Johnson  almost  two  months
later,  Sept.  25,  1964,  told  the  American  electorate "We   don't
want  American  boys  to  do  the  fighting  for  Asian  boys  .  .  .
and  get   tied  down  in  a  land  war   in  Asia,"  and  three  days
later  "we  arc  not  going  north  and  drop  bombs  at  this  stage
of  the game.  .  .  . We  are going  to  continue to  try to get  them
to  save  their  own  freedom  with  their  own  men."
Who  would  have  been  cynical  enough  to  suspect  that  "at
this  stage  of  the  game"  might  mean  only  until  the  election
was  over  and  Goldwater defeated ?   Who  would  have  thought
that  the  government  could  engage in  secret  preparations to  do
What  McNamara  Called  A  Limited   Reprisal
".  .  .  the  destroyers  relayed   messages   stating   that
they  had  avoided a  number  of  torpedoes,  that  they  had
been  under  repeated   attack,   and  that  they  had  sunk
"two  of  the  attacking  craft.    By  midnight  local  time,  the
destroyers  reported  that,  even  though  many  torpedoes
had  been  fired  at  them,  they  had  suffered   no  hits  nor
casualties. . . .
"The   U.S.   military   response   was  carefully  planned
and  effectively  carried  out.  . .  .  These  reprisal  attacks
.  .  .  were  limited  in scale  .  .  . our naval  air  forces
launched  64 sortie  attacks  against  4  North  Vietnamese
patrol  boat  bases  and  against   a  major  supporting  oil
storage  depot.  . . .  10% of North  Vietnam's  petroleum
storage  capacity  was 90% destroyed.  .  .  .  Some 25
North   Vietnamese   patrol   boats   were   destroyed    or
damaged'."    —McNamara's   report   to  Senate   Foreign
Relations  and  Armed  Services  Committees.
When  Senator  Sparkman  asked  the  Secretary  wheth-
er  North  Vietnam  had  a  navy,  McNamara  replied  that
it  "has  had  about  12 patrol  boats  known as  PT-4s,  and
something  on  the  order  of  30 similar  type  boats known
as  Swatow  boats,  something  on  the  order  of  40  to  50
patrol-type  vessels."   So this  one  reprisal  raid  wrecked
half  of  its  entire  navy.   Quite a  reprisal  for  an  attack
in  which  we suffered  not  a  single  hit  or  casualty.
exactly  what  the  President  was  telling  us  in  the  campaign  he
would  not  do?   That  the  members  of  these  two  Senate  com-
mittees,  with  the  exception  only  of  Senator  Morse,  would  fa-
vorably  report  out  a  resolution  giving  Johnson  a  blank  check
for   wider  war  even  after  hearing   this   testimony?    As   dis-
turbing   as  Johnson's   duplicity  is  Senatorial  acquiescence  in
secret  government.    The  Pentagon  and  State  are  able  to  draw
Senate   committees  into  a   conspiracy  of   silence   against   the
people's  supposed   right  to  know  what  is  happening  to  them.
Isn't  it  time to  challenge  a  system of  secrecy which  makes  the
military  the  masters  of  policy?    The   material  on  these  two
pages  is  devoted  to  its  exposure.    For  few  if  any  newspapers
reported  what  was  in  this  transcript  when   fianlly   released.
So  We Got  Ready  to  Do Exactly  What  Japan  and  Our  Other  Allies  Hoped  We  Wouldn't
Sen.  Smathers:  Two questions:  First,  what  has  been—or
is  it  too  early  to  determine—the  reaction  of  our  action  in
Japan,  and  the  Philippines?    I  am  particularly  interested
in  those  two  areas.
Sec.   Rusk:  The  government  of  the   Philippines   gave  us
whole-hearted  support  on  this,  very  glad  to  see  the  action
taken.   In  Japan  the  attitude was  that  taken  in  many coun-
tries  around  the  world,  complete  understanding  of  the  nec-
essity  of  the  action.
The  Japanese  Government  referred  to  this  as  inevitable,
this  response.    But on the  other  hand  expressed  some strong
hope  that  this  itself  would  not  lead  to  a  major  escalation
of  the  war.    We  have  had  that  right  around  the  world,  a
high  degree  of  understanding  of  the  necessity  for  the  coun-
ter-action,  and  also  a  hope  that  it  will  not  escalate."
—Newly   released   transcript   of   the   Tonkin   Bay   resolu-
tion  hearing  before   Senate  Foreign  Relations  Aug.  6,  1964.
"In  view  of  the  unprovoked  and  deliberate  attacks  in  in-
ternational waters on our  naval  vessels  and  bearing  in  mind
that  the  best  way  to  deter  escalation  is  to  be  prepared  for
it,  the  President  and  his  principal  advisers  concluded  that
additional  precautionary  measures  were  required  in  South-
east   Asia.    Certain  military  deployments  to  the  area  are
therefore   now  underway.   These  include:
"a.  Transfer  of  an  attack  carrier  group  from  the  Pacific
Coast  to  the  Western  Pacific;
"b.  Movement of  interceptor  and  fighter  bomber  aircraft
into  South  Vietnam;
"c.  MOVEMENT OF   FIGHTER   BOMBER  AIRCRAFT
INTO  THAILAND  (emphasis  added);
"d.  Transfer  of  interceptor  and  fighter  bomber  squadrons
from  the  U.S.  to  advance  bases  in  the   Pacific.
"e.  Movement of  an  anti-submarine  force  into  the   South
China   Sea;
"f.  The  altering  and  readying  for  movement  of   selected
Army  and  Marine  forces."
—Statement  to  the  Committee  by  McNamara  at  pps.  6-7
of   the  hearing,  disclosing  for   the   first   time   the   extensive
escalation  prepared  under   cover  of   the   Tonkin   Bay   inci-
dents  and  kept   secret  during   the  election  campaign.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  December  5, 1966
What  the  Government  Tried  to  Black  Out  of  That  Tonkin  Bay  Hearing Record
Maybe  the  Pentagon   Had  Better   Censor   the  Congressional  Record,  Too
"In  going  over  the  transcript   [of  the  Aug.  6,  1964  hear-
ing  before  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  on  the  Ton-
kin   Bay  resolution]  as  approved  by  the  Executive  Branch,
I  noted that  all  references  were  deleted  to  the  point  I  raised
early  in  the  hearing  concerning  the  raids  made  on  North
Vietnamese  islands  by  South  Vietnamese war  vessels  shortly
before  the  incident  between  the  Maddox  and  the  North  Viet-
namese  torpedo  boats.    By  no  stretch  of  the  imagination  is
this  security  information, since there  were published accounts
of   the  raids.    I   can   understand   why  the   Administration
wants  to  cover  up  any  mention  of  these  raids  in  the   official
records  of  the   Committee's  deliberations  on  the   Southeast
Asia  resolution,  but  I  resent  the  attempt  to  delete  my com-
ments  about  the  subject  when  they  were  not  in  any  way
based  on  information from   official  sources."
—Sen.  Morse  in  letter  to Secretary  Rusk, Sept.  16, 1966.
"The  reason  for  doing  so  was  that  these  questions,  while
not  classified  in  themselves,  were  questions  to  which  classi-
fied  answers  were  given. ...  I  can  assure  you  that   these
recommended  deletions  were  not  in  any  way  an  attempt  at
censorship.  .  .  ."
—Ass't  Secty  MacArthur  replying  Sept. 22,1966.
Sec.  McNAMARA:  I  would  like  to  cover  three  points.     1st,
[deleted].    The  Maddox  was  operating  in  international   wa-
ters,  was  carrying  out  a  routine  patrol  of  the  type  we carry
out  all  over  the  world  at  all  times.    [Deleted].    I  think  it
is  extremely  important  that  you  understand  this.    If  there
is  any  misunderstanding  on that  we should  discuss  this  point
at  some  length.
Sen.   MORSE:  I  think  we  should.
Sec.  McNAMARA:  I  say  this  flatly;  this  is  a  fact.
Sen.  MORSE:  What  was  your  testimony  the  other  day,  Mr.
Secretary,  on  the  record  [deleted].
Sec.  McNAMARA:  I  testified  the  other  day  that  the  Amer-
ican  vessels  were,  or  the  American  vessel  was—it  was  the
Maddox  at  that  time—was  operating  on  a  southerly  course
in   routine    patrol    in   international   waters   in   this   area
[deleted].
Sen.   MORSE:  [Deleted].  *  *  *
Sen.   CARLSON:  As  I  gather  this  attack  on  the  USS  Mad-
dox  was  a  surprise.    Press  reports  indicate  there  is  a  con-
tinuous  infiltration  of  Southern  Vietnamese  into  North  Viet-
nam.    [Deleted.]    How good  is  our  intelligence  in  this  area?
Sec.  McNAMARA:  This  is  such  a  highly  classified  subject,
Senator   Carlson,  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  answer  your  ques-
tion  fully.
Sen.   CARLSON:  I  will  not  ask  you  to  discuss  it   then.
Sec.  MCNAMARA:  [Deleted].  *  *  *
Sen.  CHURCH:  Secretary  Rusk  .  . . there  is one other  area
here  raised  by  Senator   Morse  to  some  degree   [deleted].
Sec.  RUSK:   [Deleted.]
Sen.  MORSE:  Could  I  ask  one  question  of  fact  on  patrol?
[Four  pages  later  he  finally  gets  his  chance.]    I  thought  he
ought  to  tell  us  in  the  establishment  of  patrols  of  our  ships,
how  close  they  will  come  to  the  North  Vietnam  border.    The
other   day  the  Secretary   testified  that  the  ships  at   a  time
were  within  11 miles,  which  shows we  did  not  recognize their
12-mile  limit.  . . .
Sec.   RUSK:  [Deleted]   miles.
Gen.    WHEELER:  [Deleted]  miles  is  the   answer.
Sen.  MORSE:  I  just  want  to  say  it  is  too  close  if  you  want
to  keep  yourself  in  position  and  not  be  subject  to  the  charge
of  provocation.
—From  the  transcript  as now  released Nov.  ZIt, 1966.
"In  a  very  recent  incident which was the forerunner  to  the
attacks  on  American  destroyers   in  the   Tonkin   Bay,  it   is
known  that  South  Vietnamese  naval  vessels  bombarded  two
North  Vietnamese  islands  within  3  to  5  or  6  miles  off  the
main  coast.  .  .  .  While  the  South   Vietnamese  vessels   were
11                                                                                       IS
Widening  the  Credibility  Gap
'The  determination  of  the  Administration  to  rewrite
the  history of  relations between North  and  South  Viet-
nam  was  never  more  evident  than  it  was  in Secretary
McNamara's  statement,  on  p.  26  of   the  hearing,  that
he  knew  nothing  of  any  desire  on  the   part  of  South
Vietnam  to  'go  north.'  .  .  .  Yet  the  views of  President
Diem  on  this  matter  were  well  known. ...  On July  16,
1955,   the  government  of  Diem  announced its  refusal  to
meet   with   representatives  of   North   Vietnam   to   lay
plans  for  the  elections  to  unify  the  country  called  for
by  the  1954  Geneva  agreement.    It  used  these  words,
'.  .  .  The  mission  falls  to  us,  the  Nationalists,  to  ac-
complish  the  reunification  of  our country. ...  To  those
who  live  above  the  17th  Parallel,  I  ask  them  to  have
confidence.     With   the   agreement  and  the   backing  of
the  free  world,  the  National Government  will  bring you
independence  in  freedom.'    In  1958  the  Diem  govern-
ment  created the  Committee for  the  Liberation of  North
Vietnam.    Is  it  possible  that  all  this  was  really  un-
known  to  Secretary  McNamara  in  1964?    What  is  left
of  his  discussion  with  Senator  Carlson  [see  this  page]
suggests  that he  knew  something  of  the  activities South
Vietnam   was  carrying  on  against   the   North  in  pur-
suance of  its  announced intentions.   The  Vietnam  credi-
bility   gap  is  further   widened,  not  only   by  what   was
left  in  this  particular  hearing  record, but  by  what  was
taken  out."
—From  Morse's   press  release  of  Nov.  24   protesting
the  censorship   of  the   Tonkin  Bay   Senate   hearing.
attacking  the  North  Vietnamese  islands,  the  newspapers  tell
us that  U.S.  vessels  of  war  were  patrolling  Tonkin  Bay,  pre-
sumably  some  6  to  11 miles  off  the  shore  of  North  Vietnam.
Was  the  U.S.  Navy  standing  guard  while  vessels  of  South
Vietnam  shelled  North  Vietnam?   That  is  the  clear  implica-
tion  of  the  incident.  .  .  .  The  U.S.  also  knew that  the  South
Vietnamese   vessels   planned  to   bomb,  and   did   bomb,   two
North  Vietnamese   islands  within  3  to  6  miles  off  the  coast
of  North  Vietnam. ... It  should be unnecessary  to point out
either  to  the  Senate  or  the  American  people  what  the  posi-
tion  of  the  U.S.  and  its  people  would  be  if  the  tables  were
reversed  and  Soviet  warships  and  submarines  were  to  patrol
5  to  11  miles  at   sea  while  Cuban  vessels  bombarded  Key
West."                                 —Morse  in the Senate  August  5, 1964.
"We  knew  for  quite  some  time  that  the  dictator   of  South
Vietnam  has  wanted  to  go  north.    We  know  that   recently
there  was  a  big  demonstration  in  Saigon,  staged  pretty much
by   students,   but   there   were  others,   and   in   response  to  a
speech  made  by  Dictator  Khanh,  the  cry  was  'Go  north,  go
north,  go  north'  which  meant  escalating  the  war  into  North
Vietnam.  . . .
.   "On  Friday,  July  31, the  war  was  escalated  to  the  North.
That  is  not  a  matter  of  infiltration.    That  is  not  a  matter  of
junks  trying  to  bring  in  supplies.    That  is  not  a  matter  of
South  Vietnamese  people  being  slipped  into  North  Vietnam
or   of   North   Vietnamese   intelligence   agents   being   slipped
into  South  Vietnam.   This  was  a  well-thought   out  military
operation.    These  islands  were  bombed.   When  these  islands
were  bombed,  American destroyers  were  on  patrol  in Tonkin
Bay,  and  they  were  not  60 or  65 miles  away.  .  . .
"If   Senators  want  my  opinion,  a  'snowjob'   is  being   done
on  us  by  the  Pentagon   and  the  State  Department   in  regard
to  that  bombardment.    Not  only  had  we  full   knowledge  of
it,  but  it  was  being  done  with  our  tacit  approval.    If  we did
not  want  to  escalate  the  war  into  North  Vietnam, that  was
the  time  for  the   U.S.  to  stop  escalating."
—Morse  in  the Senate  next  day  Aug.  6,1964.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's   Weekly,  December  5,1966
No  Easy  Answers  in  the  Middle  East
(Continued   from   Page One)
Nothing  could  be  more  ludicrous  than  the  idea  that  this
deteriorating   situation   can   be   shorn   up   by  giving  36   new
model  jets  to  King  Hussein,  or  by  sending  the  Sixth  Fleet  to
the  scene.    This  is  a  political  crisis  and   it  can  only  be  met
by  political means.    The  United  Nations  has  become  a  kind
of  world  Oxford  debating  union.    As  Chief  Adebo  of   Ni-
geria   said  in  the  debate  on  the  Jordanian  complaint,  "The
Security  Council,  in  a  spirit  of  self-complacency  bordering   on
self-deception,   seeks  to  conclude   each  and   every  one   of   its
deliberations   by  merely  formulating  a   resolution."     In   the
earlier  October   debate  on  the  Israeli  complaint  against  Syria,
when   a   Soviet   veto   blocked   a   judgment   that   might   have
calmed  the  spirit  of  desperation  on  the  Israeli  side,  the  Ni-
gerian  said  peace  depended   on  "the readiness  of   the  great
Powers  to  deal  with  this  problem   outside  of  the  'cold  war'
context  and  purely  with  the  future  happiness  of  the   parties
to  the  dispute."     Again,  in  the  Jordanian  debate,  the   wise
Nigerian   urged   that   "to   bring   stable   peace   to  the   Middle
East"  it  was  essential  "to  tackle  the  Palestine  problem   as  a
whole  and   not  piecemeal  on  the   basis  of   incidents  and  re-
prisals."    It  was  this  failure  to  deal  with  the  broader  aspects
of  the  problem  which led New  Zealand  to  abstain  on  the final
vote,  and  the  Netherlands  to  express  its  dissatisfaction.
Never  in  15  Years
The   Israeli  have  been  taught  by  a  bitter  history  that   the
UN  acts  only when  they  take  up  arms.    If  not  for  their  own
efforts,  they would  have been  overwhelmed  in  1948.   In 1956
their  Suez  campaign  destroyed  the  Soviet  arms  stockpiled  for
their  destruction  and  at  least  forced  the  UN   to  end   Egypt's
illegal  blockade of  their  only  outlet  to  the  Eastern  seas  on  the
Gulf  of  Akaba.   The  Security  Council  has  never  in  15  years
been  able  to  adopt  a  resolution  on  Israel's  complaints.    The
c|iiestion  for  Israel  is  one  of  survival.   But  the  moral  tragedy
for  world  Jewry  is  that  we  could  not  make  homes   for   our
postwar  refugees  without  making  three  quarters  of  a  million
kindred   people   homeless.    No   solution  can  be  found   until
we  Jews  ourselves  are  willing  to  face  up  to  the  problem   in
Stennis  Questions  LBJ's  Asian  Policy
"North   Vietnam   is   a   small,   non-industrial  nation
with  a  population  of  only  17  million. ...  It  has  prac-
tically   no  Navy  or  Air   Force.     Yet  we  have  had  to
commit   more  than  425,000  men  on  land  and  sea. .  .  .
There  are  reliable  estimates  that  indicate  750,000  may
be  required,  and  that  the  war  might  continue for  many
years.  .  .  .  We  must  win  the  war  or  an  honorable set-
tlement  .  .  .  however,  I  think  we  must  begin  now  to
seriously  consider  whether  our  long-term  national  in-
terests  lie  in  Asia.  .  .  .  The  Asian   population   totals
almost  2  billion.    Ours  is  only   193,000,000.    A  third-
rate  nation  there now has  us  pinned down and is heavily
draining  our  resources.  .  .  .  The culture,  religion,  phil-
osophy,  traditions and the  way  of  life  .  .  .  are  greatly
different   from  ours.  .  .  .  The  burden  of  providing  the
economic  and  military  needs  of   that  area  is   far   too
great.  .  .  .  Our genuine   long-term   national   interest,  I
believe,  lies  in  those  areas  of  the  world  which  histor-
ically  have  been  of  importance to  us. ...     Latin Amer-
ica  ...     Western  Europe."
—Sen.  Stennis  to  the  Miss.  Mfrs.    Assoc.,  Nov. 4.
all  its  terrible  three-dimensional   human  complexity  and  that
means  to  see  it  through  Arab  eyes  as  well  as  our  own.    They
see  it,  as  Mr.  El-Farrah  of  Jordan   told  the  Security  Council,
as  "the forcible  occupation  of  territory  from  its  rightful own-
ers  by  foreigners"   and  "the refusal  of  the  occupying   author-
ity  to  permit   repatriation."    The   Israeli   look  at  their  open
borders  and  fear  extinction.     The  Arab  refugees—in   bitter-
ness  and  frustration   that   also   commands   our   understanding
and  pity—see  their  lost   farms  and  homes.    Until  their  just
claims  have  been  met there  can be no peace  in  the  area.   This
struggle  of  right  against  right  offers  no  easy  solutions,   but  it
holds  great  dangers  for  world  peace.    These  might  be  averted
by  a  fresh  effort  on  the  part  of  the  whole  world  Jewish  com-
munity  to  resolve  the  Arab  refugee   problem.     Peace  also  re-
quires  the  two  great  Powers  to  suspend   their  rivalries  in  the
area,  and  permit  a  program   of  repatriation   and   compensation
as  part  of  a  final  settlement  in  a  neutralized  Middle  East,  in
which  Arab  and  Jew  can  be  reconciled.     The   likelihood   is
slight,  and  the  outlook dim.
We'll  Be Clod to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly
I'lease   renew   (or   enter)
Street   ..................................
City   ....................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)   Name  .......................
Qtroat
City
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
7in...  ... ...      Statp  . ...
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  Q
12/6/66
Fifties
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week   in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published   and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.:  $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   *20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED