I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966apr18.pdf

============================================================

IPS  Off  for   Viet  Nam,  See P.  4
Perhaps  NATO  Should  Have  Sent  Paratroops  to  Keep  Nguyen  Dwight  Ike  in  Power
"Suppose  that  our  allies  in  Europe are  working  with  the
Eisenhower  Administration, and  then  there  is  a  change  of
government.    Is  this  regarded  as  a  great  loss  of  face  on
their  part,  that  the  people  of  the  United  States  decided  to
elect  President  Kennedy, for  example?"
—Under  Secretary  of  State  Ball, sweating  it  out  on  CBS
Face  the  Nation  April  10 in  an  effort    to  prove  that  all  was
for  the  best in  Saigon.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  16APRIL  18,  1966
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Biggest  CIA  Operation  Since  the  Bay of  Pigs?
The  biggest  blank  spot  in  press  coverage  of  the  Vietnam
crisis  is  just  what  happened  in  the  provincial  elections  held
there  last  May.    A  fuller  picture  of  that  experiment  in  elec-
tions  might  help  to  explain  why  distrust  of  the  military  is  so
strong  that  of  the  170 leaders  the  Generals  invited  to  the  Na-
tional  Political  Congress  only  92  showed  up.    "Later  in  the
day,"  Beverly  Deepe  reported   (New   York    Herald-Tribune,
April  13),  "one  prominent  politician  moved  that  the  confer-
ence  be  dissolved—and  the  attendance  dropped  to  70."     The
opening  session  was  boycotted  not  only  by  the  Buddhists  but
by  Father  Hoang  Quynh,  leader  of  the  bitter-ender  Catholic
refugees   from  the  North,  on  whom  the   U.S.   Embassy  had
been  counting  as  a  pro-war  "Third  Force."    The  Viet   Cong
may  be  a  minority, but  when  you  add  to  it  the  Buddhists  and
Father  Quynh's  following,  it  should  be  clear  that  this  is  one
head  count  we  have  already  lost..
How  to  Stack  The  Cards  In Advance
The   elections   of   last  May  take  on   triple   significance   at
this  moment.    First  they  were  a  sample  of  what  to  expect  if
the  military  hold  elections.    Secondly  they  throw  some  light
on  the  rather  murky  charge  that  the  Buddhists  want  "Bud-
dhist  controlled  elections."    This  sounds  very  crass,  expressed
as  it  is  in  the  news  dispatches.    It  becomes  more  understand-
able  if  it  is  only  an  invidious  way  to  describe  Buddhist  de-
mands  that  conditions  be  set  assuring that  the  elections  would
not  be  rigged   in  advance.    Thirdly,   the  military  want  the
country's  Constitution  to  be  drafted  by  a  Constituent  Assem-
bly  made up  half  of  men  appointed  by  the  military junta  and
half  of  provincial  councillors  elected   in  last  May's  election.
This  would  stack  the  cards,  and  determine  what  kind  of  elec-
tions  would  be  held  and  what  kind  of  government  would  be
elected.    The  Buddhists  want  the  Constitution  to  be  drafted
by  a popularly  elected Assembly.
Free  elections  require  more  than  an  honest  count.     There
must  be  freedom  of  speech  and  press  to  discuss  the  issues.
There  must  be  freedom  for  political  parties  to  put  up  candi-
dates.    Though  State  Department   representatives  have  been
boasting   vaguely   of   last   May's   elections   in   Congressional
hearings,  no  one  has  been   astute  enough   to  question  them
about  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  held.    Very  little
can  be  found   about  these  elections   in   the  U.S.,   French   or
British  press.    We  do  know  that  freedom  of  press  and  speech
was  not  restored  for  the  election  campaign  and  we  do  know
U.S.  Intelligence  in  Action  I
Mr.   Sander  VANOCUR:  Mr.  Bundy   what   are   the
Buddhists  in  South  Vietnam,  and  what  do  they  want?
Mr.  Wm.  P.  BUNDY  (Ass't  Secretary  of  State   for
Far  East  Affairs,  just  back  from  Asia):  It's  I  think
misleading  to  speak  of  'the  Buddhists'  as  though  you
were  speaking  of  a  single   group.  .  .  .  There  are  the
groups  centered  in  Saigon,  who  are  led  by  Thich  Tarn
Chau  .  .  .  the  more  moderate  one  that  wants  to  get
ahead  with  the  Constitution and  the  rest.   That's  Tarn
Chau.    The  other  which  is  associated  and  I  think  led
by  Tri  Quang,  wants  to  accelerate  the  timetable  very,
very  much.
—On  NEC's   Today  show,  April   8,  transcript   made
available  at  State  Dept.  to  alert  the  press  that  Thick
Tarn  Chau  was  the  "good  guy"  among  the  Buddhists.
Saigon,  April  9  (UPI)—The  Buddhist  Church today
declared  virtual  war  against  the  tottering  government
of  Prime  Minister  Ky.    Buddhist  leaders  met  at   the
Vien  Hoa  Dao  Pagoda  late  today  and  issued  a  com-
munique  [which]  .  .  .  called  on all  Buddhists  to  form  a
nation-wide  "struggle  force"  against  Ky's  government.
The  communique was  signed  by  the  head  of  the  Bud-
dhist  Institute,  Tarn  Chau.
—Washington  Daily  News,  April   9.
that  no  political  parties  were  allowed  to  operate  and  put  up
candidates.    To  have  lifted  the  lid  would  have  been  to  risk
some  unsettling  debates  about  peace,  about  absentee  landlord-
ism  and  about  the  corrupt  and  high-handed  conduct  of  many
South  Vietnamese  military  leaders.    Just  how  the   candidates
were  chosen  has  never  been  explained.    But  we  did  find  one
tantalizing  glimpse  of  the  realities  in  Le  Monde  last  May  22.
It  published   an  Agence   France   Presse  dispatch  quoting  the
Saigon  Daily  News   as  saying  that  in  the  provincial   elections
slated  for  May  30  candidates  would  not  be  allowed  to  seek
"personal  publicity"  nor  to give  interviews, with  the  exception
of   those   "controlled   by   the   government."      Campaigns   in
which  candidates cannot  speak  freely  are  hardly  free  elections,
and  candidates  so  elected  are  hardly  the  best  men  to  write  a
free  Constitution.
The  whole  idea  of  leaving  the  writing  of  a  Constitution  in
the  hands  of  men  picked  by  this  military  junta  is  an   affront.
These generals  are  mercenaries.    Most  of  them  fought  for  the
French   against  their  own  people,  and  some  like  Ky  in  the
French   Air   Force   against   the   Algerian   nationalists   (Jerry
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  18,1966
More  Kafka  Than  Jefferson  in  The  "Reform"  of  Shadowing  Americans  Abroad
How  Secretary  Rusk  (Or the Pixie in  Him)  Conned  Senator  Teddy  Kennedy
We   never   suspected   the   Secretary   of   State   had   a   secret
sense  of  humor  until  we  began  to  dig  into  his  reply  to  Sena-
tor  Ted  Kennedy   (D.,   Mass)   in  the  Stuart  Hughes  affair.    In
a  letter  to  the   Secretary   March   23,  Senator   Kennedy   asked,
"What  is  the  basis  of  authority  for  the  Passport   Office  to  re-
quest   embassies   to   undertake   investigations   of   private    U.S.
citizens  travelling  abroad?"    In  his  reply  of  April  5, Secretary
Rusk  cited   U.S.  Code,  Title  5,  sections   22  and   151.    When
we  looked  them  up,  Section   151  turned  out  to  be:
"Establishment   of   Department:  There   shall   be   at   the
seat   of  government   an  executive  department  to  be  known
as  the  Department  of  State,  and  a  Secretary  of  State,  who
shall  be  the  head   thereof."
Section  22  said:
"The  head  of  each  department  is  authorized  to  prescribe
regulations,  not  inconsistent  with  law,  for  the  government
of   his  department,  the  conduct  of   his   officers   and   clerks,
and  the  distribution  and  performance  of  its   business  and
the  custody,   use  and  preservation   of   the   records,   papers
and  property   appertaining  to   it.     This   section   does   not
authorize   withholding   information   from    the    public   or
limiting  the  availability  of   records  to  the  public."
We  learned  that  both  statutes,  except  for  the  final  sentence
of  section   22,  were  enacted  on  July  27,  1789,   when  the  pres-
ent   government    of   our   country  was   first   organized.      We
doubt  whether   those  who   framed   them   ever   dreamed   that
they  might   some  day  be  cited  as  authority  for  the  secret  sur-
veillance  of   American  citizens  abroad.     It   is  a  pity   Senator
Kennedy   did  not   look  up  the  Code  for  himself   before  his
Senate  speech   April  5  discussing  the  Rusk  reply.    He   would
have  realized  that  he  was  being   conned.
The   last   sentence   of   Section   22  has   relevant  history.     It
was  added  to  the  original  1789   statute  in  1958  as  a  result  of
recommendations  from  the  Moss  freedom  of  information  sub-
committee  of  the  House.    Every time  Moss  and  his  investiga-
tors  found  the  Department  was withholding  information  from
the   public,  and   asked   the  Department   to  cite  authority  for
this  censorship,  the  Department  would   always  come  up  with
Section   22.     Section   22  was  no  more   intended   to  authorize
the    withholding   of    information   than    the    shadowing    of
travellers.     It  is,  however,  on   just  such  vague  statutory  meat
that  our   bureaucratic  Caesars  feed.     It  was  effrontery   of   the
Department   to   cite   these   two   statutes   as   authority   and   it
showed    how    asleep-at-the-switch   the   Senate    is   that   Rusk
was  allowed  to  get  away with  it.
The   reaction  of  the  Senate  was  characteristic. Though  we
arc  always  raising  billions  for  the  defense  of  freedom   some-
where  or  other  abroad,  there  is  nothing  to  which  our  legisla-
tors  are  more  yawningly  indifferent  than  any  question  of  civil
liberties.     So   Rusk's   letter   and   Kennedy's    speech,   though
both  were  made  available  in  advance,  elicited  no  comment   on
the  Senate   floor.   They  were  treated  as  if  they  involved  a  rou-
tine  chore  for  a  constituent.
Yet  major  questions  were  raised  by  the  Rusk  letter  and  the
Kennedy   statement.     In  the  first  place  the  letter  disclosed   in
reply  to  one  of  his  questions  that  last  year  diplomatic  posts
abroad   were   asked   to   report   on   "approximately    150"    U.S.
travellers.
What  is  the  nature  of   the  surveillance  to  which  the   150
were  subjected?    The   Rusk  letter   said   "the   diplomatic  post
simply  forwards   any  information  it  may  receive  from   items
appearing'  in  the   local   press,   reports   that  may  come   to   the
attention  of  the  post,  or  other  routine  receipt  of  information."
Knowing  the  Department's   talent  for  the  disingenuous,   it  is
naive  to   translate   this   (as   most   newspaper   accounts   have)
into  the  statement  that  the  Embassies  merely  provided   press
clippings  on  the  suspected   persons!
If  Only  Mack  Sennett  Were  Still  Alive
Do  the  diplomatic  posts  abroad  have  their  own  retinue  of
political  informers?   Is  this  what  is  meant  by  "other  routine
receipt  of  information"?    How  are  the  reporting  activities  of
the  diplomatic  posts  coordinated  with  the  reporting   activities
abroad   of  CIA  men,  FBI  operatives,  military  intelligence  at-
taches   and   men   assigned   abroad   by   the   State  Department's
own   Bureau   of   Intelligence   and   Research,   one   of   our   12
known  U.S.  gumshoe  agencies.  Indeed  how  do  they  keep  from
tripping  over  each  other?
These  are  questions   which  ought  to  be  asked  in  a  Senate
Foreign   Relations  committee  investigation.   The  progress  in
electronic  listening  devices  and  the  proliferation  of  our  huge
intelligence  bureaucracies  are  so  great  that  secret   surveillance
at  home  and  abroad  are  now  part  of  the  American  Way  of
Life.    An  occasional  inquiry by  a  Senate  committee,   however,
might  help  to  keep  this  Orwellian  cancer  within  some   bounds.
The  Rusk  letter  has  been  hailed  as  providing  some  restric-
tions.    These  turn  out  on  examination  to  be  worth  very  li;.tle.
Rusk  wrote  Kennedy  that  in  the  future  the  Justice  Department
would  ask  survelliance  of  citizens abroad  "only  in  cases  where
an  important  national  interest  would  be  served."    The   request
would  be  initiated  In  Justice  and  handled   at  State  "by  a  re-
sponsible   official."    This  is  still  the  faceless  world   of  Kafka
not  due  constitutional  process.    There  is  not  a  property  inter-
est  in  the  country  which  would   permit  itself  to  be   regulated
by   such   unseen,   unknown   and   unchallengeable   procedures.
Senator   Kennedy,   after   his  own   conferences  at  State   De-
partment,  disclosed  that  within  the  last  year  "certain  students,
certain  artists,  persons  considered   controversial  and  even  dis-
tant   relatives  of   persons   considered   controversial   have   been
singled  out  for  special  treatment",   i.e.  for  special  surveillance
while   abroad.     A   Senate   committee   ought   to   examine   all
such   cases.
"There   have   been    instances,"    Senator   Kennedy    told   an
empty   Senate   chamber,   "in   which   travellers  have   been   pre-
ceded   by  cables  describing  their  beliefs  not   because   of  evi-
dence    of   direct   communist    affiliation,    but    because    of    an
anonymous   Passport   Office   employe's  evalaution  of   the   per-
son's   views.   I   do   not   believe,   Mr.   President,"   he   added
rhetorically,   "that   we  can  continue  to  rely  on  the   ability  of
low   level   governmental   employes    to   define   what   is   good
American  thought."
This   implies  that  it's  alright  for  the  government   to   decide
what's  "good  American  thought"   so  long  as  this  is  done  by
high-level  officials!    This  resounding  anti-climax  is  the   most
disappointing  part  of  this  disappointing   story.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  18,1966
As  LBJ's  Daddy  Told  Him
Lyndon   Johnson   loves   to  talk  about  loving  the   people.
Down  in  San  Antonio  before  Easter,  he  talked  about  how
he  used  to  follow  his  Daddy  around  "barefoot ...  in  the
hot  sand  .  •  .  squeezing   the  dirt  up  between  my  toes"  and
how  his  Daddy  told  him,  "Son,  if  you  are  to  speak  for  peo-
ple,  you  must  know  them,  and  if  you  are  to  represent  peo-
ple,  you  must  love  them."    Mr.  Johnson  seemed  bathed  in
self-approval,   as   if   in   warm   molasses.     We   would   have
found  the  words  more  touching  if  he  had  spared  a  moment
earlier  in  the  week  for  the  homeless   Mississippi   Negroes
who  camped  for  four  days  at  Lafayette  square  across  from
the  White House,  hoping  for  some  response  to  the  telegram
for  help  they  had  sent  him.   Their  visit  was  an  event.    For
the   first   time   in   our   history,   black   sharecroppers   from
Mississippi,  forced  off  the  land  by  mechanization  and  crop
control,  had  gone  all  the  way  to  Washington  to  dramatize
their  plight.    Their  appearance  was  a  tribute  to  the  poverty
program.    For  all  its  shortcomings,   it  had  created  enough
hope  to  make  these  people  feel   such  an  effort  was  worth-
while.   They  felt,  for  the  first  time  in  their  lives,  as  if  they
were  citizens,  too,  who  could  come  up  and  see  the  President.
We  believe  that   a   Lincoln  or  a  Roosevelt   would  have
found  some  way  to  greet  them,  sent  out  hot  coffee,  or  even
of  an  evening  walked  over  and  asked  them  why  they  came
and  how  they  were  doing.    Lyndon Johnson  likes  to  talk  of
being  just  folks.   To have walked over  and talked with  them
would  have  really   been   in  that  Populist  tradition    Johnson
likes  to  claim  for  his  own.   "We may  be  back,"  a  spokesman
for   the   Negroes   said   as  they  left,   "because   our  faith   in
America  has  only  been  toughened,  not  tarnished."     Johnson
lost  an  opportunity.   For  once  he  might  have  been  the  real
thing.    We  wonder  whether  he  thought  about  it  as  he  was
riding  the  range  over his  ranch  during  the  Easter  week-end
as  he  loves  to  do,  in  his  big  white  Continental,  just  a  sim-
ple   chrome-plated   8-cylinder   cowpuncher   at   heart,   body
custom  made.
The Corruption of Scholarship by Our Well-Heeled Intelligence Establishment
State  and  Pentagon  replies  to  members  of  Congress  asking
more  information  on  the  Vietcong   have  been  referring   them
to   George   A.   Carver,   Jr.'s,   "The    Faceless   Viet   Cong"  in
Foreign   Affairs     for   April.    They  do   not   explain,   however,
that  Carver  is  a  CIA  man.    There  were   protests   to   Foreign
Affairs    last  year  for  failing  to  disclose  Carver's  CIA   connec-
tions  when   it  published   an  earlier  article  of  his,  "The   Real
Revolution   in  South  Vietnam"  (April,   1965).   Chalmers   M.
Roberts  in  the  Washington  Post  March  18  said  Carver  "is  cur-
rently  an  officer  of  the  Central  Intelligence   Agency "  Foreign
Affairs    editors   decline  to  confirm  or  deny  this.    They   iden-
tified  him  both  times  as  "student  of  political  theory  and  Asian
affairs,  with  degrees  from  Yale  and  Oxford;   former  officer  in
the  U.S.  aid  mission  in  Saigon;  author  of  "Aesthetics  and  the
Problem  of  Meaning."     Ex-CIA   Chief   Allen   W.  Dulles  is
on  the  advisory  board  of  Foreign   Affairs.      The  article  might
more  honestly  have  been  billed   "The   Faceless  Viet  Cong,  by
a  CIA  Man  in  False  Face."    Such  failures  to  disclose  pollute
scholarship.    There  is  no  way  of  knowing  whether  a  scholar
is  his  own  man,   or   spokesman   for   the   secret   police.     The
process   may   have   gone   further   than   most   of   us    suspect.
Our  James  Bonds  at Work
"Shortly  after  World  War II,  while recruiting  writers
for  the  new  Russian  language   section  of  the  Voice  of
America,  I  tried  to  engage  an old Russian  socialist  well
known  for  his  intimate  knowledge   of   and  violent  op-
position   to  Stalin's   Communism.   The  FBI  and  State
Department    security    agents,    however,    refused    him
clearance.     'We  found  socialist   literature  in  his  desk,'
they  said.    'It  was  even  written  in  Russian!'"
—Charles  W.  Thayer,  a  veteran  of  the  U.S.  Foreign
Service, reviewing  "The  Case  of  Richard  Sorge"  in  the
Washington  Post,  April  12.
Ramparts  for  April  discloses  how  Michigan  State  served  as  a
cover  for  a  $25  million,  6-year  operation,  in  support  of  Viet-
nam's   late   dictator,   Diem.     Harry   Howe   Ransom   in   The
New   Republic    (Dec.    11  "Containing  the   CIA")     revealed
that  the  Center  for  International   Studies  at  MIT   "was   at  its
founding   financed  in  part"  by  the  CIA.     Scholarship,   too,
ought  to  have  its  conflict-of-interest  ethics.    But  how  to  get
young  men  to  resist  the  lush  pastures  the  CIA  can  make  avail-
able  for  the  kind  of  scholarship  it  wants?
What  the  Booming  Business  in  Napalm   Means  Here—And  What  It  Means  There
"The  Air  Force's  napalm-B  program  is  rapidly   beginning
to  shape  up  as  a  big  outlet   for  polystyrene.     Last   week
United  Technological  Center  (Sunnyvale,  Calif.)  was  award-
ed  an  Air  Force  contract   to  supply  100  million  pounds  of
the  new  napalm,  which  contains   50%  polystyrene.
"This  is  the  Air  Force's  third  procurement  in  the  secrecy
shrouded  program  in  the  past  18 months  .  .  .  and by  far  its
largest.     U.S.   production  of   straight   polystyrene   hovered
around  60  million  pounds  per  month  in  1965.    Dow  Chemi-
cal  has  just  raised  the  price  of  the  monomer  one  cent.   ["In
the  defense  world  the  laws  of  economics,"   the  reader  who
sent   us   this   item   commented,   "like   the   laws   of   reason
and   of    humanity,   seem    suspended—when   quantity   in-
creases,  price  goes  up!"]  .  .  .  The  Air  Force  has  clamped  a
tight  security  lid  on  the  napalm-B program,  chiefly   because
of  fear  of  picketing  by  antiwar  demonstrators.   Such  demon-
strations  already  have  been  staged  at  United   Technology."
—Chemical  and  Engineering  News,  weekly   organ   of  the
American  Chemical  Society,  March  14.
"There  were  sometimes  two  in  a bed; now  and then,  three.
They  were  peasants  of  all  ages,  badly  battered.    Abdominal
wounds  were  numerous,  inflicted  by  bullets,  shell-bursts  or
bombs,  grenades  or  mines.    'Half  inflicted  by  the  Vietcong,
half  by  the  Vietnamese  or  the   Americans,"  a   Vietnamese
hospital  doctor  told  me.   'Those  you  see  here  are  those  who
were  able  to  come.    For  every  one  who  can  reach  a  town,
there  are  10  who  die  in  the  village  or  the  fields  or  wherever
they  are  struck.   This  is  true  above  all  of  the  badly  burned.'
"There   were   several   of   the   'napalmed.'    An   old   man,
whose  torso  and  arms  disappeared   under  heavy   bandages.
A  young  girl  with  her  face  frightfully  swollen  and  bespat-
tered  with  burns.   A  little  chap,  12  years  perhaps,  who  was
finishing  his  convalescence   in  a  wheel-chair:   at  the  end  of
his   legs,   there   were   only   some   sort   of   fearful   reddish
stumps,   all   that   remained  of   his   poor  feet   destroyed   by
napalm."
—Robert   Guillian,   describing   a  visit   to  a   hospital    in
Central  Vietnam,  Le  Monde,  March   12.
6     '•
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April 18,1986
A  Social  Revolution  in  Which  the  Big Landlords  Are  Left  Undisturbed
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Tallmer  in  N.  Y.  Post,  April  3).  It  i* no  accident  that "our
boy"   in  this  situation  is  a  General   who   not   only  regards
Hitler   as  his  hero  but  was  dumb  enough  to  say  so.    And
Adolf  Hitler—if  we  may  slip  the  CIA  some  hot  poop—was
not  just  a  Jefferson  with  a  mustache.    Ky  would  like  to  put
off   elections  as  long  as  possible.     Even  at  this  moment  he
is  incautious  enough   to  give  the  German  newsweekly,  Der
Spiegel,   (Reuters,   April  12)   an  interview  saying  that   free
elections  could  not  be  held  until  75  to  80%   of  the  country
was  pacified.    That  might  take  five  years,  or  it  might  take
10.    McNamara  told  the  Senate  supplemental   appropriations
hearings  earlier  this  year  that  Ky  told   him  that  his  regime
only  controlled   about  25%   of  the  people,   and  McNamara
told  Senator  Mansfield  at  those  hearings  he  thought  this  "a
much  more  realistic  appraisal"  than  the  53%  "our field rep-
resentatives" claimed.
Strange  Kind  of  Revolution
Ky  told  Der  Spiegel  elections  must  wait  on  the  success  of
the   pacification   program.    This  was  the  subject  of   a  CBS
special  we  saw  last  night.    The  give-away  in  this  show  was
that  for  all  the  repeated  talk  of  bringing  about  a  social  revolu-
tion  in  the  countryside  not  one  word  was  said  about  land
reform,  or  even  lower  rents  for  the  peasants,   and  not  one
word  about electing  village councils.   One honest  U.S.  adviser,
asked  whether  the  CIA-trained  "Rural  Reconstruction"  teams
were  as  good  as  the  Viet  Cong,  said  "not yet" and  added
that  the  difference  was that our  teams  didn't  have  a  program!
How  do  you  make  a  revolution  in  a  peasant  country without
taking  a  position  on  the  land  question?    When  you  stand
with  the  absentee  landlords  and  their  military  men  against
the  landless?    Charles  Collingwood  admitted  the  new pro-
gram  is  a  lot  like  those  we  heard  about  in  the  past.    Diem's
brother,  Nhu,  had  a  private  army  of  bully  boys,  hotel  dicks
and  right-wing mystics who were going to bring about a  "revo-
lution"  in  the  countryside, also  without  disturbing  the  land-
lords.    These   new  teams,  Mr.   Collingwood   said,  were  the
ClA's  own  revolutionaries and  represented  "the biggest  CIA
operation  since the  Bay of  Pigs—and  hopefully  more success-
U.S.  Intelligence   in  Action  II
"There's  been  no  sign  that  any  of  these  movements,
bar  a  very  occasional  slogan  that  is  inserted  by  some
really   extreme  fellow,   have  anything  to  do  with  not
going   ahead   with  the   war   or   not  being   opposed   to
Communism."
—Ass't  See.  of  State  for  the  Far  East  Bundy,  just
back  from  Saigon,  on NBC's  Today  show, April  8.
"Two  keys  explain   the  demonstrations  now  taking
place  in  Vietnam.   The first is  that  the  population  as  a
whole   wants   peace,   as   soon   as   possible.    It   knows
peace   would  probably  mean,  sooner  or  later,  a  Com-
munist  regime.   But today  the choice is  clearly   between
surviving  with  the  Vietcong  or  letting   the   Americans
continue  their  destruction  of  Vietnam,  in  the  name  of
liberty   and  democracy.    No  Vietnamese  today  thinks
that  this  war  is  his.   The  majority  think  it  an  affair
exclusively   American,  a  settling  of  accounts  between
Washington  and  Peking   which,  unhappily,  takes  place
on  their  territory.  .  .  .  They  do not  pardon  the  Ameri-
cans   for  killing  without  much  discrimination   anyone
who is  yellow  on the  pretext  that  he  might  well  be red,
and  for  having  converted  Saigon  into  a  gigantic  brothel
[lupanar]  for  the  relaxation  of  the  soldier.   Desire  for
peace  and hostility  to  the  Americans  are the  two points
which  coincide  exactly  with  the  Vietcong  program."
—Max  Clos  (just   back  from  Saigon)  in  the  pro-U.S.
French  daily,  Le  Figaro,  April   4-
fully."    We  hope  President  Johnson  saw  that  program,  and
remembered  Kennedy's  experience.    The  secret  police  appara-
tus  which  turned   up  on  the  anti-peasant  side  and   guessed
wrong  in  Guatemala,  Cuba  and  the  Dominican  Republic  isn't
going  to  bring  about  a  social  revolution  in  Vietnam.
Johnson  was  the  victim  of  bad  intelligence  when  he  linked
his  prestige  with Ky's  at  Honolulu.    The  answer  of  the  mili-
tary-intelligence  bureaucracy  to  another  resounding  failure  is
to  step  up  U.S. bombing  in  the  North.    Like  panicky  gam-
blers,  they're  going   for   broke.    They'll   have  us  in  a  war
with  China  rather  than  admit  their  bankruptcy  in  Vietnam.
The  best  thing  which  could  happen  to  us  would  be  the  elec-
tion  of  a  representative government  in  Saigon,  ready to  nego-
tiate  an  honorable  peace  and  a  neutralist  solution.      April  1)
IPS  Leaving  for  Vietnam—As  Usual  With  Foreign  Assignments  the  Weekly   Must  Suspend
for   Two  Weeks  to  Make   This  Trip  Possible—Next  Letter  from  Saigon
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      $618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................ZoBe............St*te...............»...
4/18/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   rf   announcement  wished  O
/ E  Stone'sWeekly
5618   Nebraska  Av..,  N.  W.
Wathhiitmi,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED