I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966oct17.pdf

============================================================

How  the Government Secretly  Subsidises  Books,  P.  3
Even  the  Stock  Market  Votes  for  Peace
"Only  a  move  toward  the  peace  table  in  Vietnam  could  really  turn  this  market  around."
—A  New  York   Stock  Exchange  floor  broker  as  the  market  hits  its  lowest  in  three  years.  New  York  Times,  Oct. 7
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  32
October   17,   1966WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Bobby  Bakerism  On  A World  Scale
If  Johnson  really  believes in  co-existence, the  place  to  prove
it  is  in  Vietnam.   "Our  task,"  he  told  the  editorial  writers  in
New  York  last  Friday,  "is  to  achieve  a  reconciliation  with  the
East,  a  shift   from   the  narrow  concept  of  coexistence  to   the
broader  vision  of  peaceful  engagement."     If  that  were  really
his  purpose,  he  could  not  find  more  willing  collaborators  than
Ho  Chi  Minh  and  the  South  Vietnamese  National  Liberation
Front.    Ho  Chi  Minh  has  been  trying  all  his  life  to  find  a
basis  not  only  for   coexistence  but   for   a  "broader   vision  of
peaceful  engagement"  with  the  West.    This  is  why  he  nego-
tiated  the  agreements   to  stay  in  the  French  Union  after  the
war,  and  why  he  signed  the  Geneva  pact  in   1954,  and  why
time  after  time he  has  offered   to  settle  the  present  conflict  on
a  basis which  would  give  South  Vietnam  democratic self-gov-
ernment  and  neutrality in  a  framework  which  recognized  the
principle  of  Vietnam's  essential  national  unity  without  insist-
ing  on  reunification  at  this time.
The  Place  for   Re-Engagement
A  broad  vision  of  peaceful  engagement  also  lies  behind  the
program  of  the  NLF.     In  calling,  from   its  beginning,  for  a
neutral  belt  of  South  Vietnam, Laos  and  Cambodia,  the  NLF
suggested   engaging   three  different   neighboring  peoples  with
different  social  systems  in  a  common  effort  to  insulate  them-
selves  from  great  Power  politics and  ideological  rivalry.    The
latest  interview  given  Wilfred   Burchett  by  the  head  of   the
NLF  also  envisages  peaceful  engagement   within  South  Viet-
nam  in  calling-for  the  broadest  kind  of  coalition  government
to  restore  peace  and   make  possible  social  reconstruction.    I
am  convinced   from  my  talks  last  spring  in  Saigon  and  Cam-
bodia  that  most  Vietnamese  on  both  sides  are  ready  for  just
such  a  fraternal  ^-engagement.    The  NLF  would  like  Amer-
ican  help  in  reconstruction  once  American  troops  have   left.
The  replacement  of  napalm  with  aid  would  be  the  symbol  and
the  guarantee  of  just  that  peaceful  engagement  Johnson  says
he  wants,  but  refuses  to  seek,  in  the  one  place  where  it  counts,
in  the  country our  bombers  have  so  ravaged  North  and  South
a   recently   returned  flier  described   it  as  a  lunar   landscape,
cratered  and   denuded.
We  could  not  achieve  a  greater  moral  and  political  victory
over  China  than  to  demonstrate,  by  a  peace  negotiated  with
the  NLF,   that  co-existence  with  the  United   States  is  possible,
that  we  do  not  oppose  social change,  that  we  are  not  the  cita-
del  of  world  counter-revolution.   But  that  is  not  what  John-
son  means  by  co-existence  and  peaceful   engagement.     What
he  seeks  is  to  buy  the  acquiescence  of  Moscow  and  of  Eastern
Not  Welcome  In  Japan  Either
"Tokyo  (AP)—The  government  of  Japan—America's
strongest  ally  in  this  part  of  the  world—is  relieved  he
isn't  coming  to  visit.   Washington  said  Johnson  wished
to  avoid embarrassing  Prime Minister Sato  with  a  visit
that  would  tie  Japan  to  allied  participants in  the  Viet-
nam   war   [at   Manila].    Besides  the  virtual  certainty
of  anti-American demonstrations  and  possible  violence,
leaders  of  Japan's  ruling  party  believe  a  Johnson  visit
could  do  little  for  Sato,  already  besmirched  by  corrup-
tion   in  his   own  party.    There   is   little  sentiment   in
Japan  in  favor  of   U.S.  prosecution  of  the  Vietnamese
war   although  Japanese   industries   did   a   $35  million
business   supplying   the   American  military   last   year.
That  figure  is  expected to  exceed  $150 million  this  year.
... To Japanese  newsmen  yesterday,  Vice  Foreign Min-
ister  Shimoda  said  a  Johnson  visit  at  this  time  would
stir  up suspicion. ..."
—Washington  Evening Star, Oct. 7
Europe  in  crushing  the  Vietnamese  rebellion  and  if  necessary
China  should  Peking  intervene.   This  is  wheeler-dealerism on
a  world  scale,  the  application  to  international affairs  of  those
talents  for  seduction  and  corruption  which  have  served  Lyn-
don  Johnson   so  well  in  his  climb  to  power.     He  has  been
eager  to  talk  with  everybody  except  the  brave  men  we   have-
been  fighting;  he  has  offered  concessions  not  only  to  Moscow
but  to  Peking  and  even  to  Hanoi  if  they  would  abandon  the
South   Vietnamese   rebels  to  our  merciless  military   machine.
Not   "let   us  reason  together"  but  let  us  haggle  together   has
been  his  guiding  principle.    To  the  blackmail  of  the  North
Vietnamese  bombings,  he  adds  the  bribery  of  economic  and
political   favors  for   East  Europe.    This   is  Bobby   Bakerism
globalized.
Johnson  has  ruined  morally  all  who  deal  with  him  at  home
and  he  will  ruin  all  who  deal  with  him  abroad.     Humphrey
and  Goldberg  have  been  destroyed  by  the  seductive  arts  that
turned  them  into  his  tools,  and  the  same  fate  awaits  the  East
Europeans   who  accept   his  favors  while  he  rains  death  and
destruction   worse   than   any  mankind   has   seen   since  World
War  II  on  a  small  and  poorly  defended   country.    We  do  not
compare  Johnson  to  Hitler  nor  our  country  to  Nazi   Germany
but  Der  Fuehrer  at  Munich,   too,  assured   Chamberlain   there
would  be  peace  in  our  time  if  only  the  West  recognized  the
right  of  the  Sudeten   Germans   to  dismember    Czechoslovakia
in  the  name  of  self-determination.     Every  step  of  Nazi  ex-
pansion,   down   to   the  Nazi-Soviet   pact,  was  proclaimed  as
(Continued    on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 17, 1866
How  the  FBI,  the  Internal  Revenue  Bureau  and  the  Portland  Red  Squad  Cooperated
Appeals  Court  Reverses  Income Tax  Conviction  As Fruit  of A  Witch  Hunt
In  recent  years  there  has  sometimes  been  reason  to  wonder
whether  the  Internal   Revenue  Bureau  used  tax   prosecutions
to  punish  political  dissenters.    Vincent  Hallinan,  the  Progres-
sive  Party  candidate  for  President   in  1952,  was  an  outstand-
ing  example;  he  served  a  prison  term  for  tax  evasion.    In  tax
prosecutions  the  line  between  error  and  fraud  is not  always too
clear,  but  political  motivations  are  hard  to  prove.   This  gives
a  special  interest  to  the  decision  by the  U.S.  Court  of  Appeals
for  the  Ninth  Circuit  af  San  Francisco  last  week  in  Reuben
G.  Lenske  v.  U.S.    It  reversed  an  income  tax  conviction  on
the  ground  that  this  was  an  effort  to  punish  Lenske—a  Port-
land,  Oregon,  attorney—for  non-conformist  political  activities.
He  Showed  "Operation  Abolition"
The  opinion  was written  by J.  Warren  Madden,  a  kw  pro-
fessor   who  was  chairman  of   the  National   Labor   Relations
Board  in  the  best  days  of  the  New  Deal  and  was  later  ap-
pointed   to  the   U.S.   Court   of   Claims.    When   the   Special
Agent's  original  recommendation  for  prosecution  came to  light
during  the  trial,  it  showed  "that  he  placed  high  among  the
reasons  why  Lenske  should   be  criminally  prosecuted   for   in-
come  tax   evasion   Lenske's   being  a   left-wing   lawyer,"   the
Appeals   court  noted,   "and   having  unorthodox   political   and
social  ideas."   The  Agent  reported  that  Lenske  called  a  meet-
ing  to  organize  a  chapter  of  the  Lawyers'  Guild,  that  "Oper-
ation  Abolition"  was  shown  at  the  meeting,  that  he  had  writ-
ten  a letter  to  a  local  paper  criticizing  U.S.  foreign  policy,  and
that  the  local  office  of  the  FBI  and  "the  Intelligence  Division"
of  the  Portland  police  considered  him  a  Communist.
The  Court  held  that  the  Agent's  superiors  in  the  Internal
Revenue  Bureau,  when  it  saw  this  evidence  of  political  moti-
vation  in  his  report   "should  have  immediately  removed  him
from  the  case  and  discarded  every  judgment  which  was  con-
tained  in  his  recommendation."    The  Court  said  this  should
Useful  Quote  For  Humphrey  Hecklers
"Be aggressive—even  a  little  hostile—don't  take  any
glib   generalities."
—Vice   President   Humphrey    to   the    International
Association  of  Police  Chiefs   in  Philadelphia  (Baltimore
Sun,  Oct. 6)  a  speech in  which  Humhprey  drew  a  roar
of   applause   by  interpolating   the  remark   that   he  had
no  use  for  civilian  police  review  boards  when  he  was
Mayor   of  Minneapolis   and  implying   that   he  had  none
now.     In  view  of  the  crucial  vote  coming  up  in   New
York  City  on just  such  a  board,  we  regard  the  Hum-
phrey   remark   as   a  dangerous  and   shameless   bit  of
opportunism.    His  reference    to  glib  generalities   came
in  a  passage  urging  the  police  chiefs   to  marshal  more
support  for  the  war  against  crime  and  brought  "a   soft
growl  of  approval."    Who  could  be  a  greater  expert  on
glib  generalities  than   Humphrey?
have  shown  the  Bureau  that  the  Agent  "was   confused  with
regard  to  his  duties  and  with  regard  to  the  basic  ideals  of  his
government."
This  bias seems  to have  led  to  some  "gross  miscalculations."
The   Agent,   after   two   and   a   half   years   of    investigation,
charged  that  Lenske  owed  $11,465.74  for   1955.    The  trial
judge  reduced  this  to  $414.78.  The  Agent  claimed  $5,225.77
in  tax  evasion  for  1956.    The  trial  court  found  instead  a  tax
loss  of  $9,231.59.    The  Appeals  Court  also  found  that  the
government  had  been  unfair   in  withholding  information  to
which  the  defense  was  entitled   under  the  rather  tricky   "net
worth"  mode  of  prosecution.    We  recommend  these  technical
aspects  of  the  decision  to  lawyers  and  applaud  its  declaration
on  reversal,  "This  court  will  not  place  its  stamp  of  approval
upon  a  witch  hunt,  a  crusade  to  rid   society  of   unorthodox
thinkers  and   actors   by  using  Federal   income  tax   laws  and
Federal  courts  to  put  such  people  in  the  penitentiary."
San  Francisco's  Foremost  Newspaper  Satirist  Looks  Into  the  German  Problem
By  Arthur  Hoppe
High-level  negotiations  have  been  going  on  in  Washington
over  what  is  called  "The  German  Problem."    Which  is  what
Germany  has  been  called  for  50  years.   To  do  my  part,  I've
been  conducting low  level  negotiations   with  Baron  Max  von
Blue,*  the   democracy-loving uberoberfuhrer   of  West   Vater-
land,   that    peace-loving   Central    European    Republic   and
Marching  Society.
The  Baron,  looking  natty  in  a  pin-striped  suit  with  epau-
lettes  and  jack  boots,  welcomed me with  the  traditional  West
Vaterland   form    of   greeting:   "I-have-never-been-a-Nazi-I
didn't   know-what-was-going-on-and-good-morning."
*       *       *
I  said  I'd  come to  discuss  the  200,000 American occupation
troops  that  had  been  stationed   in  West  Vaterland   for   the
past  20 years.    "Ach,  don't  apologize,"  said  the  Baron.   "We
are  a  poor,  defeated  nation  which  gladly  bows its  neck to  the
yoke  of  our  conquerors.    For  we  have  humbly  learned   our
lesson  and  we  will  never  make  war  again.    Heil  peace!"
Fine,  I  said.    But  actually  we'd  now like'to  withdraw  our
troops  because  we need  them  elsewhere  and .  . .
"What!"  cried   the   Baron.    "You   would   leave   us   poor,
peace-loving  Vaterlanders   utterly   defenseless?"
But,  I  said,  we  couldn't  afford  it  any  more.   To  off-set  the
cost  of  maintaining  these  troops,  Vaterland  had  promised  to
buy   $500  million  worth  of  U.  S.  weapons  annually.    And  I
reminded  him  Vaterland  hadn't  bought  a  thing  in  two  years.
"Himmel,  we'd  like  to,"  he  said.   "But  who  needs ?    We're
up  to  here  already  in  weapons."
Well,  couldn't  he  draft  200,000  young  Vaterlanders   to  re-
place  our  troops?
"They  all  got  deferments,"  he  said,  "from  working in  de-
fense  plants."
But  certainly  no  one  would  dare  attack   Vaterland  in  the
face  of our vast  nuclear  power.  .  .  .
The  Baron's  eyes  lit  up.    "Did  you  bring  me  my  nuclear
trigger?"  he  asked  eagerly.   "It  is  such  a  little  thing  we
peace-loving   Vaterlanders    request—one   little   peace-loving
finger  on  your  nuclear  trigger.    A  pinkie,  even.    Ach,  then
we  would  see  about reunification."
Oh,  yes,  there  was  also  the  problem  of  reunification  with
East  Vaterland.
"For  starters,"  said  the  Baron,  rubbing  his  hands,  a  lock
of  black  hair  falling  over  one  eye  and  his  little  moustache
bristling.    "Then,  see,  we  reunify   the  Lowlands.    Crashing
through  the  Maginot  Line  we reunify  France.   Then reunify-
ing  our  way  eastward  to  the  Urals,  our  peace-loving  Panzer
divisions  wheel  south  across  the  Caucasus.  .  .  .
*        *       *
As  I  tiptoed  out,  the  baron  was  shouting,  "Today,  Vater-
land;  tomorrow, reunification!"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   October  17,  1966
New  Revelations  Show   USIA  and  State,  Perhaps  Also  CIA,  in  This  Operation  Brainwash
How the Government Secretly Subsidizes Books As Foreign Policy Propaganda
The  publishing business needs  a  Pure  Food  and  Drug  Act
of   its  own  which  will  require  that  books  subsidized  by  the
government  be  plainly  labelled.  The  first  indication  that  the
US  Information   Agency  was  secretly  subsidizing  books  came
with  the  belated  release  last  December  of  the  House  Appro-
priations  Committee  hearings  on  the  USIA  budget   for   fiscal
1965.    There   (at  p.  455)   Reed  Harris  of  USIA  explained
a  $195,000  item  for  "Book  Development."     He  said  this  was
a  program  "under  which  we  can  have  books  written  to  our
own  specifications,  books that would  not  otherwise  be  put  out,
especially  those  books  that  have  strong  anti-Communist con-
tent,  and  follow  other  themes  that  are  particularly useful  for
our  purposes.    Under  the  book  development  program  we  con-
trol  the  thing   from   the  very   idea  down  to  the  final   edited
manuscript."    The  italics  are  ours.
"Tailoring"  Is  The  USIA's  Word  For  It
When   the  hearings  were  finally  published,  the  names  of
the  books  and  their  authors  were  blacked  out   "because"  as
Harris   explained,   "our   interest   in   certain   of   these   books
should  not  become  a  matter  of  general  public  information."
He  mentioned  an  anti-Castro book  among  those  secretly  sub-
sidized,  and  also  a  study of  Communist  tactics by  "a  socialist-
type  organization" on  which  USIA  spent   $14,952.
A  hint  that  other  Federal  agencies  subsidize  books  appeared
when  Lipscomb  (R.   Cal)   asked  why  such  books  had   to  be
subsidized.    Louis  A.  Fanget,  in  charge  of  the  book  program,
said  that  ordinarily   American  publishers  would  not  publish
anti-Communist  books  "because  they  do  not  sell  .  .  . and  even
those  published  commercially  sometimes  have  some  Federal
support  behind  them."  Do  other  agencies  like  the  CIA  also
subsidize  books?
Originally  this  book  program  was  part  of  a  foreign  propa-
ganda  operation.   During  the  fiscal  1966  hearings   (p.   418)
Lipscomb  asked  Harris  why  these  books   should   be  sold   at
home,   Harris  replied,   "These   are   responsible   people   with
scholarly  reputations and  they  would  not  undertake  the  work
at  all  if   they  were  subject  to  that  restriction."     Apparently
the  marketing,  i.e.  money  making  restriction  means  more  to
these  scholars  than  freedom  from   the   propaganda   agency's
blue  pencil.
An  example  of  these  writers  is  Jay  Mallin,  the  author  of
three  books.   The  first  was "Fortress  Cuba"  (Van  Nostrand).
One  wonders whether it  is  the  anti-Castro book  referred  to  in
the   censored  testimony  above.    The   second   was  Caribbean
Crisis,  a  book  about  the  U.S.  intervention in  the  Dominican
Praeger  Heads  List  of  the  Subsidized
For   the   first  time   this   year,   under   pressure   from
House   Appropriations   Committee,   the   U.S.    Informa-
tion   Agency  has  declassified   the  list  of  books  it   sub-
sidized.   Of  $53,591  spent  on  16 books  in  the  fiscal  year
1965,  half,  or  $27,108  went  to  Praeger,  Inc.  USIA  spent
$3,000  to  finance  the  writing  of  Ralph  P.  Slater's  Sword
and  the  Plow  for  Praeger.    It  also  gave  what  it  calls
'publication   support  —  regular"  to  Praeger   for   five
other  books:  Joseph  Hevi's  Dragon's  Embrace  ($2,570);
James  Wadsworth's  Glass  House  ($7,850),  J.  D.  Atkin-
son's   Communist    Front  as   Weapon  of   Political   War-
fare   ($8,250);   Richard   N.   Gardner's   In   Pursuit   of
World   Order    ($2,500)   and   Hoang   Van   Chi's   From
Colonialism   to   Communism   ($2,938).    The  others  on
this  list  were  Appleton-Century  Croft   (Raymond's  Half
the   World's   People,   $7,735);  Prentice   Hall   (Burton's
Concise  History  of   the  Communist  Party:  $4,500   and
Davis's   American    Negro   Reference    Book:   $2,985);
Bobbs-Merrill  (Wittlen's Time  Stopped  at  6:30: $3,000);
Dell   (Brooks'  Toil   and  Trouble:  $2,578);   Curriculum
Rev.   (Mead   and  Brown's  The   Wagon   and  the   Star:
$7,275)  and  Bantam  (NY  Times,  The  Witness:  $1,770).
Republic   (also  Van  Nostrand).     When  Leonard  Marks,  at
the  close  of  the  testimony quoted  below,  suddenly  decided  in
embarrassment  to  de-classify  this  book  information,  it  turned
out  that  $2,368  had  been  paid  Mallin   for  this  book.     Van
Nostrand  this year  has  just  published  a  third  book  by  Mallin,
"Terror  in  Vietnam."    This  book  does  not  appear  on  the  list
released   with  the  fiscal  1967   hearings.    "Does  that   mean,"
this  Weekly  asked   Fanget,   "that   the  USIA  did  not  finance
the  later  book,  or  simply that  it was not  included  on  the  list?"
Fanget  replied  cryptically  "I  would  say  that  was  an  accurate
statement."     He  pointed  out  that  the  list  only  covered   books
subsidized  in  fiscal   1965.
When   the  New   York   Times   (Oct.   3)   questioned   USIA
officials  about  the  Mallin  book  on  the  Dominican  crisis,  their
explanation  was  that  they  knew  several  books  were  in  prepa-
ration  and  "feared  they  might  present  the  case  in  a  light  un-
favorable  to  Washington"   so  they  got  in  touch  with  Mallin,
a  Time  correspondent  who had  covered  it.    The  State  Depart-
ment  allowed  him  access  to  "certain  classified documents"  for
background  and  deleted  certain  phrases  when  the  manuscript
was  submitted  to  it  for   clearance.    Nothing  in  the  volume
would  lead  the  reader  to  suspect  it  was  financed  and  cleared
by  the  government.    This  Big  Brotherism  in  the  book  busi-
ness  is  likely  to  grow  if   unprotested.
Portrait   of  A  Bureaucrat   Trying
Mr.  LIPSCOMB  (R.  Cal.):  Why  is  it   wrong   to  let   the
American   people   know  when  they   buy  and  read  the   book
that  it  was  developed   under   government   sponsorship?
Mr.  Leonard  H.  MARKS  (Director,   USIA):  It   minimizes
their  value. ...  If  we  say  this  is  our  book,  then  the  author
is  a  government   employe   in  effect.     It  changes  the  whole
status  of  the  author. ...   •
Mr.  LIPSCOMB:  I  assume  that  you  are  distributing  them
overseas,  for   lack   of   a  better   word,  for   propaganda   pur-
poses.
Mr.  MARKS:  Yes,  definitely,  to  tell  a  story.
to  Talk  Himself  Out  of  A  Tight  Spot
Mr.  LIPSCOMB:  Is  it  being  sold  in  the  United  States  for
propaganda    purposes?
Mr.  MARKS:  No.
Mr.  LIPSCOMB:   Then  there  is  an  awfully  fine  line  that
exists  here.
Mr.  MARKS:  Propaganda  has  to  be  defined.    I  would  like
to  go  into  this  very  briefly.    Propaganda  has  the  overtones
of   Hitler  Germany   where  there  is  lying,  where  there  is  a
misrepresentation.    I  do  not  believe  in  that.    I  have  said
time  and again  that  all  we  have  to  do is  tell  the  truth.
—House  Approp.  1967  hearings  pps.  620-22
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  October 17, 1966
The  Essential  Issue  Is  What  We  Are  Doing  to  the  People  of Vietnam
(Continued   from   Page  One)
just  a  step  toward  peace.    But  if  our  military  machine  crushes
the  Vietnamese  rebellion,  it  will  mete  out  similar  punishment
wherever   subject   peoples   seek   their   freedom   from   corrupt
oligarchies  linked  with  American  interests.    Vietnam   is  in-
tended  to  be  a  lesson  to  the  poor  of  Brazil  and  to  the dis-
affected  everywhere;  a  training  ground  for  the  Legions  of  the
Pax  Americana.     If  our  military  win  in  Vietnam  there  will
be  no  holding  them  elsewhere  or  at  home.
Respect  for  Boundaries?
The  essential   issue  is  the  suffering  of  the  Vietnamese peo-
ple  and  our  unwillingness  to  bring  it  to  an  end  unless   they
surrender  to  our  will.    The  threatening  precedent  is  the  right
of  any  great  Power  to  bomb  any  small  power  into  submission.
The  test of  the  United  Nations  is  whether  it  can  focus  clearly
and  sharply   on  this  crime  and  this  menace  to  world   order.
To   offer   Eastern   Europe  more  business  and  better  credits  if
they  will  shut  their  eyes  to  this  is  not  conciliation  but  corrup-
tion.   To  offer  Moscow  a  non-proliferation  treaty  for  acquies-
cence  in  what  we  are  doing  is  to  shelve  German  nuclear  am-
bitions  at  the  price  of  a  far  greater  threat  to  world  law  and
order.   What  value  is  to  be  placed  on  our  hint  that  we may
accept  boundaries  in  Eastern  Europe  when  we  violate them  in
Eastern  Asia?    How  firm  will  the  Oder-Neisse  line  be  when*
we  get  through  with  the  boundaries  of  North  Vietnam  and
Laos  and  Cambodia  and   Thailand?
Let  us  try  to  see what  is  happening  in  a  fresh   perspective.
What  if  Japan  were  again  a  great  military  power  and  it  was
bombing  a  small  country  in  Latin  America   allied   with   the
United   States?    What  would   we  think  if   our   Secretary  of
State  paid  a  friendly  visit  to  the  Prime  Minister  of  Japan  un-
der   such  circumstances  and   began   to  negotiate   favors   from
him,  like  landing  rights  for  a  New  York   to  Tokyo  airline?
Imagine  how  Latin  allies under  Japanese  bombardment  would
feel  if  they  saw pictures  of  their  supposed  American  protector
in  friendly  confabulation  with  Tokyo?    This  may  help  us  to
see  what  Johnson  has  already  achieved  in  his  talks with Gro-
myko.    Whatever  else  comes  of  them,  the  moral  affect  is  de-
What  McNamara  Will  Not  Admit   Publicly
"With    the    fighting    below    the    demilitarized   zone
reaching  at  times  the  ferocity of  the  Korean  war; with
Binddinh  Province  again  a  battleground, and  with  the
decision,   still   unratified   but   apparently  accepted   in
principle  to  put  American troops  in  the  delta  south  of
Saigon  (a  battalion of  25th Division infantry  is  already
in    Longan    province),    military   advisers   argue   that
Americans  are  spread  too  thin,  and the  safety  of troops
already  in  the  country  requires reinforcements.   All  of
this  has  raised  anew  the  question:  what  of  the  Saigon
army?     The   answer  was   given  off-handedly   by   one
well-placed   American  who  said   flatly:   They   are   no
longer  part  of  the  show'."
—Ward  Just  from  Saigon,  Washington  Post, Oct.  6
American  people.     He  drags  us  down  into  moral   imbecility
as  we  allow  the  killings and  the  burnings  and  the defoliations
and  the  lying  to  go  on.    Johnson   speaks  of  defending   "free-
dom"   in  South  Vietnam  but  Poland's   deputy   Foreign Min-
ister,  Winiewicz,  spoke  the  plain  truth  when  he  told  the  UN
General  Assembly  last  Monday  that  "the  imposition  by  force
of  a  military junta"  upon   the  people  of  South  Vietnam  was
being  presented  by  the  U.S.  as  "an  implementation  of   the
principle   of   self-determination."     Compare   the   Orwellian
double-think  of  Johnson's  speech  with  the  anguished  descrip-
tion  of  what  we  are  really  doing   to  South  Vietnam  in   the
New   York   Times   Magazine   last   Sunday  (Oct.  9)   by  Neil
Sheehan,  just  back  from  three  years  of  covering  the war.
"I  wonder,"  Sheehan  wrote,   "when   I  look  at  the  bombed-
out  peasant  hamlets,  the  orphans  begging  and  stealing  in  the
streets,  and  the  women  and  children  with  napalm  burns  lying
on  the  hospital  cots,  whether  the  United  States  or  any  nation
has  the  right  to  inflict  this  suffering  and  degradation   on  an-
other  people  for  its  own  ends."
This  is  the  abomination  against  which  the  world's  consci-
ence  must  be  mobilized.    This  is  the  horror  we  must  not  let
any  phoney  olive  branches  elsewhere  hide  from  view.    This
is  the  crime  our  country  is committing.    And  this  is  what  we
must  condemn,  lest  a  later  generation  ask  of  us,  as  they  ask
of  the  Germans,  who  spoke  up?basing.     Johnson   debases  the   Russians   and   he   debases   the
We'll  Be Clad to Send A  Sample  Copy  of This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
Also  PLEASE  Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers  Urgent
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly         r.618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ......................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State..
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ............................................................
Street    ..............................:.......................................
10/17/66
City   ....................................    Zip................   State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and  the
flnt   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published   and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED