I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966dec19.pdf

============================================================

Why  Sweden  Refuses   to Sell  US. Arms for   Vietnam, P.  3
As  If  Johnson  Didn't  Have  Enough  Trouble  Already  With  The  Pope's  Peace  Appeal
"Let    America  realize  that  self-scrutiny  is  not.  treason,     instead,  the  road  to  national  disintegration.  .  .  .  Critical
self-examination  is  not  disloyalty.  Patriotism  is  not a  cloak      thinkers   and  thinking   critics   constitute   the   lifeblood   of
for  the  blanket  and  blind  acceptance  of  all  decisions  made     any   society."
by  the  United  States.    This  is  not  patriotism.   It  can  be,          —Boston's  Cardinal  Gushing  in  a  pastoral   letter  Dec.  10.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XIV,  NO.  41
December   19,  1966
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
IB  CENTS
Why  Not  Bring  Christmas  Up  to  Date?
One  bit  of  holiday  cheer  is  the  news  that  for  years  to  come
we  won't  need   a  poverty  program   for  the  Pentagon.     The
December   issue   of   Air   Force,  just  in   time   for   Christmas,
brings  a  projection   into  the   1980s  by  a  Col.   Posvar  who  is
chairman  of  the  Division  of  Social  Sciences  at  the  U.S.   Air
Force  Academy.    It  shows  a  globe  with  the  northern  section
of   Richer  Nations  as  white  as  new-fallen   snow   while   the
southern   section   of   Poorer   Nations   is  prettily   pockmarked
with  little  red  symbols  showing  various  kinds  of  armed  con-
flict—enough  to  keep  his  graduates  busy  into  their  old   age.
He   sees   (in   capitals)   "Revolution   Rampant  in   Africa   and
Latin  America"   and   even  touches  cheerfully   on  the   "policy
dilemmas"  which  will  arise  as Communists  "maneuver  us  into
a  choice"  between  supporting  "local  elements"   with   "reason-
able  social  and  economic  grievances"  but  "tainted   with  com-
munism"   or   "supporting    reactionary  or   racist   governments
that  are  resisting  change."     He  leaves  the  reader  to  guess—
it's   not  hard—which   side  our   B-52s  will  bolster.
The  Romans  Were  More  Successful
This  is  the   shape  of   that   Pax  Americana   for  .which   the
Pentagon    labors.     Like   Trotzkyists   in   reverse   our  military
dream  of  permanent  revolution  requiring  permanent  agencies
of   suppression.     Their  in-house  literature  looks   back  to  the
Pax  Romana,  and   extols   it  as  having  given   the  world   five
unparalleled   centuries  of  law  and  order.    The  troubles  they
don't   speak   about   also   parallel   those   of   the   Romans,   the
need   for   a  virile  fighting  ideology   to   combat   a   subversive
faith.    The  Romans  seem  gradually  to  have  solved  the  prob-
lem.    At  first,  as  Gibbon  ironically describes  them,  the  Chris-
tians  persisted   in  "their  humane  ignorance"  and   could   not
"be  convinced  that  it  was  lawful  on  any  occasion  to  shed  the
blood  of  our  fellow  creatures."     But  by  the  Fifth  century,  as
portrayed   by   Gibbon's   continuator,   Dean   Milman,   in   his
History   of  Latin   Christianity,   "The   Christian  God  .  .  .  had
become  a God of  battle.    The  cross  . . . glittered  on the stand-
ards  of  the  legions.  .  .  . We  find  bishops  in  arms."
Now  they  seem  to  be  relapsing   into  their  old  ways.    The
Pope,  not  satisfied  with  Christmas  and  New   Year   truces  in
Vietnam,  is  calling  for  one  continuous  holiday  armistice lead-
ing  to  negotiations.     The  Protestants   are  no  better  than   the
Catholics.    The  National  Council  of  Churches   wants  to  stop
Bobby  Beginning   to  Sound  Like   Hubert
LBJ's  Just   More  Compassionate
In  Vietnam   Than  At   Home
SEN.   ROBERT  F.   KENNEDY   (rebuking  a  witness  who
questioned  President Johnson's  sincerity  on  the  poverty
program):  "President  Johnson  needs  no  defense  from
me.    The  poverty  program  originated  under  him.    He
has  immense  responsibilities,  great  problems  over  de-
fense  costs  and the budget.  Also a very serious  struggle
in   Southeast   Asia.    I  understand  the   difficulties   you
face.    But  the  President  is  a  man  of  great  compassion.
He  is  also  facing  problems that  are  perhaps more  dif-
ficult  for  you  to understand."
MRS.   KATIE  EIDLEY,  head  of  the  Howard  Road  Ten-
ants  Council:  "I'm  not  knocking the  Vietnam  war.   But
I  think  the  war  on  poverty  is  also  important.   If   we
have   to   fight   two   wars,   why   can't   we   fight   them
equally?"
SEN.   JOSEPH   CLARK   (D.  Pa.)   complaining  that   as
floor manager  for  the  anti-poverty   bill,  he  brought  a
$2.3 billion measure  to the floor this  year  only to have  it
cut  back  to  $1.75  billion  on  Johnson's  angry  insistence,
"We  are  spending  $2.5  billion  a  month  on  the  war  in
Vietnam.    Surely  we  can  spend  this  much  money  each
year  on  the  war  on  poverty."
—At  the  Ribicoff    subcommittee  hearing  Dec. 12.
the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  and  even  asks  for  more   "can-
dor",   noxiously  implying  that  our  leaders   have  been   telling
us  less  than  the  truth.    How  can  the  military  carry  out  their
invigorating  tasks  if  the  clergy go  around  whining  for  truces ?
How  can  they,  amid  all  this  pacifistic  preachment,  bring  up  a
younger  generation  to  the  manly  virtue of  visiting aerial  con-
flagration  on  obdurate villagers ?   What  could  be  more  hurtful
to  the  morale  of  our  troops  than  to  have  the  Pope  say,  as  he
did  on  Dec.  8,  "How   opposed  to  one  another  are  these  two
forms,  these  two  events,  Christmas  and  war?"     If  our  sorely
tried  military  had  to  choose  between  them,  their  only  way  out
would  be  to get  rid  of  Christmas.    A  less  radical  course  would
lead  to  its  modernization.    Surely,  considering   the   resources
and  the  willing  intellectuals at  its  disposal,  the  Pentagon   could
convert  it  into  a  Holiday   of  Pacification,  with  Kris  Kingle
jumping  out  of  a  helicopter  in  a  jolly  Green  Beret,   gifts   in
one  hand  for  the  submissive  and  in  the  other  a  little  can  of
instant  hell  to  napalm  the  wicked.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  19, 1966
More Urgent Than The Space Pact: To Stop the Anti-Ballistic Missile  Race  .
Antarctica   is  safe  for   penguins,   but   we  have   no   faith  in
the  new  Soviet-American  space  treaty.    We  think  it  will  last
until  one  side  or  the  other  discovers  some  splendid   new  way
to  store  weapons  of   mass  destruction   in  orbit,  whence  they
can  be  hurled  down   like  lightning  on  an  enemy.     Our  own
space  program   is  heavily   infiltrated  by  the   military  and   we
doubt  that  the  Soviet's   is  any  different.
New  Arms  Race  on  Earth  The   Danger
We   agree  with   Senator   Kuchel   (D.   Cat.)   that   the   draft
agreement  on  nuclear  weapons  on  space  ought  not  to  distract
attention  from  the  more  urgent  problem  of  keeping  the  anti-
ballistic  missile  from  setting  off  a  new  spiral  in  the  arms  race.
Kuchel  called  for  a  Soviet-American  conference   on  the  anti-
ballistic   missile.     We   think   it  ought  to  be  the  subject   of  a
world   conference,  since  a  new  speedup  in  the  arms  race  and
in  tension   will  gravely   affect   the  hope  of  the  poorer   nations
for  aid,  and  deepen  the  shadow  of  a  nuclear  holocaust.   This
is  not  just  a  private  matter   for   settlement   between  Moscow
and  Washington.
What  we  also  need  is  the  appointment   of  a  new  high  level
commission   at  home  to  study  the  whole   subject  of  the  anti-
missile.  .  .  .  Leaders  of  the  poor  should  pay attention,  for  this
could  be  the  biggest  bonanza  in  years  for  the  armament   and
electronic   industries,    siphoning   off   more   money   from   the
poor.  .  .  .  The  military-industrial complex  profited   from  the
bomber  and  the  missile  gap   scares   and  the   anti-missile   gap
scare  is made  to  order  along  the  same  lines.  .  .  .  Biggest  ques-
tion  for   an  investigating  commission:  What  does  saving  30
million  lives  mean  if  we  still  have  70  million  dead?   At  what
point  do  deaths  and  casualties  of   such  magnitude  mean  the
end  of  organized  society  as we  have  known  it?  ...     There  is
no  safety  in  this  Strangelovian  arithmetic.    Only  some   form
of   world  government   in   which   individual  nations   renounce
their  arms  and  their  right  to  kill  can  save  mankind.  .  .  .  Gen.
Omar  Bradley  said  the  last  word  on  the  subject  in  his  address
at  St.  Albans  here  in  1957  when  he  said  "Missiles  will  bring
anti-missiles,   and   anti-missiles  will   bring   anti-anti-missiles"
but  at  some  point  "this  whole  electronic  house  of  cards"  will
collapse   unless   men   have   developed   safer   means   of  living
together.  .  .  .
Who  Killed  Tran  Van  Van?
The  murder of  Tran  Van  Van—Ky's  foremost civilian
rival—is  becoming  Saigon's   No.  1  scandal.    The  Viet-
nam   Guardian   has   been   suspended   for   printing  two
pictures   which   cast   doubt   on  the   government's  story
that   he   was   assassinated    by   the   Viet   Cong    (Wash.
Post,  Dec.  13).    The  Saigon   Post  fears  it  will  be  sus-
pended  because   copies  of  its  Dec.  12  issue  with  an  edi-
torial   questioning  the   official   version   hit   the   streets
before  the  censor  blacked  it  out  (Bait.  Sun,  Dec.   13.)
The   Saigon   Post   spoke   of   "political   foul   play"  and
called  for  an independent investigation headed  by  a  man
of  integrity  "preferably   from  South  Vietnam  proper."
This  is  a  dig  at  the  Ky  military  junta  which  is  made
up  almost  entirely  of  Northerners.    Richard  Critchfield
(Wash.  Star,  Dec.  8)  reported  that  three  weeks  before
Tran   was   killed  he   showed   Critchfield   an  article  the
censors   had  barred,  exposing   the   junta   as   Northern
members  of  the  clandestine  Dai  Viet  party  which  ran
the  last   French  puppet  regime  in  Hanoi  from  1949  to
1954.    Tran  said  he  had  warned  Ky's  Information Min-
ister,  Gen.  Bao  Tri,  that  if  censored  at  home  he  would
publish   the   article   abroad.     Critchfield    said   "many
Southerners  will  blame  the  Dai  Viet"  for  Tran's  mur-
der  "since  in  1950  they  were  implicated in  more  politi-
cal  assassinations   than  the  Viet   Minh,  led  by  Ho  Chi
Minh."    Tran's   murder,  he  wrote,  left  the   Southerners
"with  few  leaders  to  rally  behind."   The  Tran  funeral
orations  pointedly  failed  to  blame  the  Viet  Cong  (Bait.
Sun,  Dec.  12).    Both  Hanoi  and  the  National  Liberation
Front   accuse   the  military  of   the  murder.
LOST  CHANCE  FOR  PEACE  WITH  CHINA:  Some  day,
when  there is  a real  investigation  of  U.S.  relations  with  China,
someone   should   look   into   the  interview   the   London   Times
(Dec.  7)  has just published  with  Two-Gun  Cohen,  the  famous
cockney  who  was  once  Sun  Yat-sen's  bodyguard   and  at   79
is  just  back  from  a  visit  to  Peking.    He  now  admits  what   he
then  denied  that  in   1955   he  took  part  in  a  secret  mission  to
reconcile   Chiang  Kai-shek,  whom  he  knows   well,   with   the
Chinese  Communist   leaders  who  also  trust  him.   The   mission
began   in  Peking   where   he  was  summoned   by  Chou  En-lai.
"The   suggestion   got  as  far  as  the  State  Department  through
an    American    intermediary,"    the   London    Times    recounts,
"but   the  idea  petered   out."     No  doubt  our  government   hated
the  idea  of  giving  up  Formosa  as  an  air  and  naval  base.   This
Either  A  Top AP  Reporter Was  Seeing  Things  or  the  Pentagon  Is  Deceiving  Itself  Again
"Air  Force  Secretary  Harold  Brown  said  today  bombing
attacks  against  North  Vietnam have  significantly  weakened
the  Communists'  ability  to  supply  combat  troops   in  South
Vietnam.    In  one  of  the  most  definitive  accounts  ever  given
on  the   U.S.   air  campaign  against   Hanoi,   Brown   said   the
North   Vietnamese  have  suffered   'serious   degradation'  of
resources  and means  of  moving  men and supplies  South.  .  . .
The  comments  came  in  a  speech  prepared  for  the  Aviation
and  Space  Writers  Association   meeting   [in  Washington]."
—Associated  Press  in  Washington  Star, Dec. 8.
"Plei  Djereng,  Central  Vietnam  Dec.  5  (AP)—North  Viet-
namese  troops  fighting  in  the  jungles  along  the  Cambodian
border  are  better  fed  and  healthier  than  they  were  a  year
ago.     No   starving   or  malaria-ridden  prisoners   are   being
taken.    The  enemy  dead  are  not  the  spindly-legged,   emaci-
ated  corpses  found  in  the  la  Drang  battles  of  December  last
year  and  February  and  March of  this  year.    Now  they  look
well  fed  and  tough.    Senior   U.S.  officers  chasing  the  Com-
munists   in  the   foothills  around  the   Special   Forces  camp,
and  in  the  mountains  along  the  Cambodian  border  to   the
west,  believe  the  North  Vietnamese  have  beaten   the  huge
supply  problem that  plagued  them  last  year,  at  least  for  the
time  being.  .  .  .  The  malaria  problem  which decimated  Com-
munist  ranks  last  year,  according  to  prisoners  picked  up  at
that  time,  has  also  been  beaten,  new  prisoners   say.     The
Communist  troops take  four  malaria  pills weekly.  .  .  .  There
seems  to  be  no  problem  in  getting  plenty  of  ammunition.
In  one  attack  on  a  4th  division  battalion,  the  Communists
fired  500  mortar  rounds,  a  huge  amount  considering  it  had
to  be  packed  through  heavy  jungles."
—Associated  Press,  by  its  famous   West  German  photog-
rapher-reporter,  Horst  Fass,  in  the  Saigon  Post  Dec.  6.   It
is   odd  that   we   should   see  this  in   the   censored    Vietnam
press  but  not  in  the  uncensored    U.S.  press.   We  learned   it
moved  on  the  AP  wire  Nov.  29 for   U.S.  publication  Dec.  4.
U.S.  editors  not  the  AP  are  to  blame  for  the  blackout.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  19, 1966
...  Time Leaders of the Poor Paid More Attention to Guaranteed Annual Income
may  have  been  one  of  the  great  lost  opportunities  of  all  time.
Easiest  Way  to  End  Poverty
It  may  not   be  as  emotionally   satisfying  as  crying  "Black
Power"  but  the  idea  of  a  guaranteed   annual  income  is  a  lot
less  pie-in-the-sky.   When   the   U.S.   Chamber   of   Commerce
listens   as   sympathetically   as   it   did   here    Dec.    9    to-   three
different    expositions    of   this   idea,   it   is   ripe   for   political
action.    The   spokesmen   were   as  divergent   in  their  views  as
the   radical   Robert   Theobald;   the   former    member   of   the
President's  Council  of  Economic  Advisers,. Prof.  James   Tobin
of  Yale,  and  Barry  Goldwater's  economic  adviser Prof.  Milton
Friedman   of   Chicago.    Though   they   disagreed   sharply   on
whether  to  use  direct  payments  or  a  negative  income  tax,  they
all   agreed   the   easiest   way  to  get  rid  of   poverty  and   mush-
rooming   welfare   costs  was  for   the  government   to   guarantee
a  minimum  income   for   every  family.   When   Henry  Hazlitt
chimed    in   to   suggest   that   relief   recipients   should   not   be
allowed  to  vote,  Friedman  retorted  that  if  this  principle  were
extended    logically   most   business   men   would   also   lose   the
right  to  vote   since  many  businesses  benefit  from   government
subsidies.    "Let   us  not  be  hypocritical,"   Friedman    declared.
"The   poor  are  not  the  only  people  at  the  public  trough."
A  TRULY  HOLY  COMMUNION:   We  had  the  pleasure
of  taking  part   in  a  tea-and-rice  dinner  here  at  St.  Stephens
Church  Dec.   12  to  launch   a  campaign   by  the  Fellowship   of
Reconciliation   and  the  International  Committee  of  Conscience
on  Vietnam  to  send  medical  and  other  supplies  to  both  sides
in  the  Vietnamese   war.   The   idea  is  by  dining  off  a  handful
of  rice  to  express  one's  communion   with  the  suffering  and  to
provide  funds  to  help   them.   Those  who  wish   to   organize
such   dinners   in  their   own   communities   during  the   holiday
season  may  obtain  directions   from  the  Fellowship  of   Recon-
ciliation,   Box   271,   Nyack,   N.Y.     Catholic,   Protestant    and
LBJ's  Desire  to  Talk  Peace  Doubted
"The  State  Dept.  now  says   that   the   U.S.    welcomes
all  efforts  for  a  'just'  solution of  the  Vietnam  war,  but
that   'nothing   useful'  can  come  from   reviving   stories
about  past  efforts  by  UN   Secretary  General  U  Thant.
This  comment leave  much to  be  desired  because  it  skips
blithely  over  the  reasons  why.  .  .  .  What  really  is  at
stake  here  is  the  credibility  of  President  Johnson's  re-
peated  assertions  that  he  has  been  willing  to  go  to  the
conference  table without preconditions at  any  place  and
at  any  time.   If  so,  what  was  the  real  reason  for  spurn-
ing  the  opportunity  to  meet  in  Rangoon?    In  late  1964
and  1965  the  military  situation  in  South  Vietnam   was
very   unfavorable.    Perhaps   this  explains   what   hap-
pened.    Or  there  may  have  been  some  other  good  rea-
sons  for  rejecting Thant's  overtures.   But  they  do  not
emerge   from   saying   in   one  breath  that   we   doubted
Hanoi's  sincerity  and  in  the  next  that  we  feared   the
effect   on   the   Saigon   government.    There  must   have
been  some  better  reason,  and  as  long  as  it  remains  un-
disclosed  the  President's  oft-stated  desire  to  'talk  peace'
will  remain  suspect   in  many  minds."
—"V   Thant's   Peace  Efforts",    editorial  Dec.  8  in  the
conservative  Washington   Star,  no  "dove"   organ.
Jewish   clergy  are  taking  part  and   the   Buddhist   poet-monk,
Thich  Nhat  Hanh,  has  helped  to  organize  the  campaign   .  .  .
Another  way  to  express  one's  feelings  is  to   join  in  with   a
group  of  SANE  and  other  organizations  suggesting  wires  to
the  President  to  extend  the  truce  into  a  peace.   If  every  reader
sent  a  wire  to  Johnson   and  got   two  friends   to  do  likewise,
that  alone  would  add  up  to  90,000  telegrams.
Christmas  Appeal:   Irrespective of  the  outcome  of  the  pend-
ing  motion  for  a  new  trial,  isn't  a  pardon   long  overdue   for
Morton   Sobell,   now   in  the   17th  year  of   a  30-year   sentence
arising  out  of  the  atom  bomb  scare  two  decades   ago?    It  has
never
1
 been  clear  just  what  he  was  accused  of  doing.
Gunnar  Myrdal  Explains  Why  Sweden  Refused  to  Sell  the  U.S.  Arms for  Use  in Vietnam
ment  by  the  ruling upper crusi.   During the  war  that  meant
collaborating  faithfully  with  the  Japanese  invaders  against
the  U.S.    Now  it  means  holding  to  the  U.S.
"If  there  is  one  thing  I  fe;.v  more  than  anything else,  it
is  that  the  strained relations between the  rich  minority  na-
tions  and  the  poor  majority  nations will  come  to  be  poisoned
by  the  color complex.   From  that  point  of  view  a  big Ameri-
can  army  bringing death  and  misery  to  a  poor  colored  na-
tion  in  Asia  by  means  of  huge  jet-bombers,  helicopters and
other  devilish  instruments  of   de:-1 motion,   including  chemi-
cals,  toxic  gases  and  jelly  gasoline, is  immensely  dangerous
for  all  our  hopes  of  world  peace,  cooperation  and  progress."
—Abridged   from   a  speech,   "The   Vietnam   War   and   the
Political   and    Moral    Isolation    of   America,"    by   Gunnar
Myrdal,    the  Swedish   sociologist    u-hose   "An   American  Di-
lemma"  is  the  most  famous  study  ever  made   of  the  Ameri-
can Negro  problem, speaking  at  an  anti-war  rally  by  SANE
and    .16  other   organizations    which    overflowed       Madison
Square  Garden,  Dec.  8,  a  speech   generally   ignored   by   Ihc
U.S.  press  except   for  a  few   lines  in  one  part  of  one  edition
in  the  New  York   Times.    Floyd   McKissick   of  COKE,    Dr.
Spock,  Norman  Thomas,  Jtiles  Feiffcr    and  IFS   were  among
the  other  speakers.    One  Senator,  McGovern  of  South  Da-
kota,  and  one  Congressman,  John  Dow  of  New  York,  sent
greetings  and  Secretary  General   U  Thant  agreed   to  receive
a  delegation  from   these  peace   organizations.
"There   is   not  a   single   government   in  Western   Europe
which  would dare  send  a  squad  of  soldiers  to  Vietnam  as  a
symbolic  gesture  of  sympathy  with the  U.S.
"Sweden  is  one  of  the  very  few  countries  where  there  is
not  a  trace  of  basic  anti-Americanism.   But  over  the  Viet-
nam  issue   the  overwhelming  majority  of   Swedish  opinion
is  sharply  critical.    Only  8%  think  America  is   doing  the
right  thing  in  Vietnam.    In  Sweden  we  have  a  fairly  large
armaments   industry   to   make  ourselves   independent.    To
keep  this   industry  efficient   we  need  to  export  armaments.
But  there  is  government  control,  so  that  armament  exports
do  not  go  to  active  disturbers  of  peace.    The  Swedish  gov-
ernment   now  includes  the   U.S.   in  this  group.    To     allow
Swedish-produced   weapons   to   be   used   in  Vietnam  would
have  outraged  Swedish  opinion.
"The   U.S.   government  might  have  sympathizers  for   its
war  in  Vietnam  among  the  ruling  whites  in  Rhodesia  and
South  Africa.    But  in  all  the  poor  and  colored  nations  in
Africa,  however  much  they  need  financial  assistance,  I know
of  no  government  or articulate individual who  can  be counted
as  a  supporter  of  the  Vietnam  policy  of  the  U.S.    I  believe
the  same  is  true  of  Latin America.   The  L
T
.S,  tries  to  create
an  image  at  home  that  it  has  trusted  allies  in  'Free  Asia.'
The  truth  is   that   [these  are]   'client   governments'.     In  a
country  like  Thailand  there  has  never  been  any  public  dis-
cussion  of   policy  issues  but  only  an  opportunistic  adjust-
!   b  .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  19, 1966
Hoffa   Decision   A   Reminder   Of   Kennedy's   Readiness   to  Use  Dirty  Methods
Bobby  vs. J.  Edgar:  A  Controversy  In  Which  Neither  Side  Is  Convincing
We  cannot  imagine  a  phonier  controversy  between   two  less
plausible  characters than J.  Edgar  Hoover  and  Robert  Kennedy
over   "bugging."   The   sudden  libertarian   passion   which  has
led   the   Johnson   Administration  voluntarily  to   disclose   the
wide  extent  of  electronic  eavesdropping   in  pending   prosecu-
tions  has  the  double  effect   of  getting  one  Bobby  (Baker)  off
the  hook  and  another  Bobby  (Kennedy)   on.   It  will  probably
end   by  keeping  Baker  out  of   jail  and   tarnishing   Kennedy's
freshly   painted  "image"  as  a  liberal.   This  is  one   of   those
controversies   in  which  neither  side  is  convincing.    A   sifting
of   the   thick  soup   that   is  Hoover's   prose  indicates  that   the
self-righteous   G-man    is   disingenuous   in   implying   that   he
never  "hugged"  a  criminal  without  the  express  permission  of
the  Attorney General.   On  the  other  hand,  Kennedy's  injured
innocence   is   not   credible  either.    He'd    have   to   be   pretty
dimwitted  not  to  suspect  where  those  "bugs"  he  listened  to
came   from,   and   what   that   "leased   line"   letter   he   signed
really  meant.    One   need   only   recall   his   effort   as  Attorney
General   to  legalize  wire-tapping to  realize  that  for  him   as  a
crime-buster  the  end   justified  the  means.
They  Hired  A  Judas
The  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  the  Hoffa  case  serves  as
another  reminder  that  Kennedy  as  Attorney  General  was  not
a   man   of   scruples    :is   to   means.   We   agree   with   the   lone
dissenter,  Chief   justice  Warren,  that  the  Justice   Department
engaged   in  dirty  business  when   it  let  Edward  Partin   out   of
a  Louisiana   jail  where  he  was  awaiting  trial  on   a  variety  of
State  and   Federal  indictments  for  embezzlement,  kidnapping,
extortion   (and   soon   perjury   and   assault)  so  he  could  keep
the  government   "informed"   as  to   Hoffa's   plans   in   fighting
prosecution.     "Certainly,"   the    Chief   Justice   wrote,    "if    a
criminal  defendant   insinuated  his  informer  into  the   prosecu-
tion's  camp  in  this  manner  he  would  be  guilty  of  obstructing
justice."     Partin's    bail   was   reduced,   charges    against    him
dropped  and  his  wife  paid  $1200.
Morally   this   was   no   less   reprehensible   than   "bugging".
Indeed  what  if  Hoffa's  counsel  now  petitions  for  a   rehearing
They  Deserve  Honor  Not   Persecution
' The   spirit   of   our   Immigration   and    Naturalization
Service   has   always   been   reactionary   and   inhumane.
We  welcome  the  rebuke  to  it  in  the  cases  of   Elizabeth
Rosalie  Woodby   and  Joseph   Sherman   whose   deporta-
tions  were  reversed  in  a  7-to-2  decision  by  the  Supreme
Court  last  Monday.    The  former  was  accused  of  having
been   a  prostitute  for   a  period  after  being   abandoned
by  her  GI  husband,  the  latter  of  having  used   a  false
passport  to  reenter  the  U.S.  almost  30  years  ago  after
fighting   for  the  Loyalists  in  Spain.    The  effect  of   the
decision  is  to  establish   for  deportation  cases  virtually
as  strict  a  rule  of  evidence as  for  a  criminal  conviction.
Since  deportation  is   fully   as  terrible  as  any   criminal
penalty,  there  is  no  reason  why  a  lesser  standard   of
proof  should  be  required.   We  welcome  the  change   in
the   law.    The   Sherman   case   is   especially    repellant.
The  informer, also  a  Loyalist  veteran,  never  was   sure
in  identifying  Sherman;  the  government  had  to  squeeze
hard  to  get   his  testimony.    Had  it  not  been  for   the
McCarran  Walter  Act   which  Congress   passed   over   a
Truman  veto  in  1952,  this  case  would  have  been   out-
lawed  by  the  statute  of  limitations.   As  it  is,  McCarran,
a  clerical  Fascist  Spanish  style,  and  Walter,  a  chronic
witch-hunter,  left   a  legacy   under  which  any   foreign-
born   veteran   of   the   Spanish   Civil  War  may   still   be
threatened   a  quarter  century  later  by  deportation   or
denaturalization.    There   was  no  nobler  and  more   pa-
thetic  cause  in  our time than this  effort  to  stop  Fascism
in   Spain  before  it  engulfed   the  world,  and  those  who
fought   there  deserve  honor  in  their  old  age,   not   con-
stant  persecution  by  petty  bureaucrats.    We wait  to  see
whether  they  will  dare  retry  the  Sherman   case.
and  asks  the  Solicitor  General  to  tell  the  Court—as  he  did  in
the  Black  and  Baker  cases—whether  Hoffa,  too,  was  subjected
to   electronic   eavesdropping   in   that   jury-tampering   prosecu-
tion?    Considering    the   mutual   hatred    between    Hoffa   and
Kennedy—so  natural  in  men  so  alike  in  their  single-minded
hunger   for   power—and   the   personal   vindictiveness   evident
in   the  prosecution,   it  would  be  a  surprise   to  learn  that  in
this   case  alone   the   Justice   Department   never   once  resorted
to  "bugging."
Warmest  Holiday  and  New  Year  Greetings  to  All  Our  Friends  and  Readers—We   Do  Not   Publish  The   Last  Two   Weeks  of  The   Year
Next  Issue  Dated  January   9,    1967
I. F. Stone's
1 'lease   renew
Street    ...........
City     ....................................
Weekly
(or  enter)
For   the   enclosed   $5  send
(To)    Name
Street   ...........
City
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Zip................  State......
a  gift  sub  to:
Zin.... ............  State......
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
12/19/66
Fifties
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,   the  last  week   in   December  and   the
first   week   in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.W.,  Washington,  D.  G,    An   independent   weekly   published  and  edited
by   1.  F.   Stone:   Circulation   Manager,   Esther   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the   U.S.:    $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Hail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED