I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966may09.pdf

============================================================

IPS  Reports from  Vietnam
Where  People  Fear  To  Mention What  They  Want  Most
"Johnson  can  talk  about  peace  in  Vietnam,  but  we  go  to  jail  for  advocating  it."
—South  Vietnamese  woman  pacifist  in  Saigon  at  a meeting  with A.  J.  Music's  CNVA  peace delegation Apr.  1966.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  16
MAY  9,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.16  CENTS
What  It's  Like  To  Be In  Saigon
What  I  remember  most  of  Saigon  is  the  heat,  the  squalor
and  the  despair.     I  began  by  being  terribly  frustrated  and
ended   by  being   terribly  fascinated.     The   frustration   arose
from  trying  to  get  things  done  in  a  country  which  seems  en-
gaged   in  a  giant  conspiracy  to   slow  everything  down;   I'd
hate  to  have  to  run  a  war  in  the  vast  snafu   that  is  South
Vietnam;  only  an  Eagle  Scout  like  Westmoreland  could  stand
it  without going  off his  rocker.    Just  what  the  fascination  was
I  don't  quite  know,  perhaps  it  was  the  ringside  seat  Saigon
offers  on  the  inexhaustible vitality and  folly  of  the human  race.
The  heat  lay  like  a  suffocating  blanket  on  the  city,  and  it
was  hard  to  know  which  was  worse,  the  sunny  days  or  the
cloudy  when  a  blue haze  of  carbon monoxide lay  low  over  the
teeming  streets.    At  night  with  the  windows  open  in  a  cheap
hotel   which   charged  New   York   prices,  one  slept   not  just
naked  but  with  every  pore  alert   for   an  occasional  hint  of
breeze.    After  the  midnight  curfew   one  is  awakened  from
time  to  time  by  the  dull  thud  of  mortars  like  a  giant  tapping
on  distant  doors.    One  night  the whole hotel  shook,  the  doors
went   rat-tat-tat,   as   a   huge   armada   passed   overhead   and
dumped  its  deadly  freight  somewhere  far  off  in  the  darkness.
There  were  three   waves  of   this  miniature  earthquake   and
one  suddenly  realized   the  meaning  of   the   term   privileged
sanctuary,  for  Americans  in  Vietnam  can  sleep  with  the  assur-
ance  that  amid  the  heavy  traffic  overhead,  there  are  no enemy
planes.    Goliath  never  had  it  so  good.
A  Government  Falling  Apart
Even  on  the  'quieter  nights,  sleep  begins  to  be  impossible
around   five.   There  is  a  constant  roar  of  heavy  trucks  from
the   clogged   waterfront   nearby.     The   noise   overhead   sur-
passes   that  in  the  areas  adjoining  La  Guardia  airport,   and
starts  much  earlier;  the  decibel  factor  alone  makes  it  easy  to
believe  that  Saigon's  Tan -Son  Nhut  is  now  the  world's  busiest
airport.    The  guerrillas  have  cut  the  railroads  and  made  the
roads  impassible  everywhere—except  for  those  who  pay  their
fees and  are granted  passage.   For  Americans it  is safe to  travel
only  in  the   skies.     In   the  morning   one  emerges   early  on
streets   from   which  the   garbage   is  no  longer   carted   away.
This  and  the  lax  currency  control  on  entry  are the  first  signs
of  disintegration;  the  government  is  falling  apart.    The  gen-
erals  maneuver,  no  longer  so  much  for   power  as  for   some
political  foothold.    Their  wives,  so  it  is  said,  are  the  brains
of  the  family  and  devote  them  to  the  business  of  selling  ex-
port  and  import  licenses.    The   coolies  who  used  to   collect
the  garbage  probably  make  five  times  as  much  now  on  the
What  The  VC  Say  In  The  Back  Alleys
"Saigon   (Vietnamese   Press),   April   24  —   Reliable
sources  in  Saigon  said  the  VC  [Viet  Cong]  has  been
exploiting  the  prices  spiralling  and  recent  political  un-
rest  in  Saigon  and some  other  cities  to  incite  the  mass,
especially   laborers,   to  struggle  for  a  higher   standard
of  living  and  for  democracy.    The  above  sources   dis-
closed   that   the   VC  spread    propaganda    leaflets   last
April  3  at  Alley  22 of  Ton  Dan  Street,  Saigon,  appeal-
ing  (sic)   the  workers  and  laborers  to  'lead'  the  strug-
gle  movement  by"  asking  for  wagelifts  and  reduction  of
working  hours.    The  leaflets  also  urged  them  to  go  on
strike  with  a  view  to  hamper  all  activities  and  upset
the  national   economy.    The  sources  said  the  VC  also
urged  youth  groups  to  organize  seminars,  adopt  reso-
lutions  and  go  on  strike  for  an  end  to  military   opera-
tions  in  the  provinces  as  well  as  for  the  cancellation of
the  curfew  and  the  drafting  into  the  armed  forces."
—Saigon  Daily  News,  April  25
docks  or  in  construction,  for  labor  is  scarce  in  the  war  boom
that  has  seized  Saigon.    One  newspaper  article  I  saw  sug-
gested  that  maybe garbage  collection  ought  to  be  handed  over
to  free  enterprise,  a  touching  testimonial  to  the  spread  of  the
American   theology   to  these  lands  beyond  the   sea.
In  the  mornings,  moving  from  air-conditioned  U.S.   offices
to  the  hot  bake-oven  outside,  one  felt  98  years old  by  10  a.m.
and   ready  to  collapse   in  a  pre-lunch   siesta  under   an   elec-
tric  fan,  those  days electricity  was  available.    After  lunch,  one
hastened   back  to  the  darkened   and  sweaty  refuge  of  one's
hotel   room.    The  once  beautiful  and  broad   avenues  of   the
great   city  outside  are  filled  with  a  mad  tangle   of   vehicles.
Here  a  tiny  donkey  cart  carries  a  rustic  family  into  town;  it
is  loaded  down  with  pots  and  pans  and  bags.    From  the  in-
terstices  children   look  out  big-eyed  with  wonder.    There  a
two-seater  cyclopus  goes  by  with  two  soigne  matrons,   exqui-
sitely  kept  in  their  privileged  middle  age,  engaged  in  shrewd
and   vivacious  conversation.     The   streets   swarm  with   cyclo-
puses—the  old  rickshaw  raised  to  a higher  technological  level
by  being  wedded  to  the  bicycle,  with  which  the  driver  pushes
from  behind.   Next  in  the  hierarchy  of  public transport  is  the
motorized  cyclopus,  then  tiny  Renault  taxis.    They  contest  die
streets  with  a  constant  flow  of  jeeps  and  military  buses.    Ma-
neuvering  dashingly  amid  this wildly  tooting herd  of   vehicles
is  an  occasional  Vietnamese  motorcycle  "cowboy"  with  minia-
ture  Stetson   and  tight  Western  movie  pants.    The   costume
makes  the  slight,  delicate-boned   Vietnamese   look  more  man-
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
6  j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 9,1966
(Continued  from  Page   One)
nikin  than  man,  a  tiny  caricature  of  a  Texan.    The  scene  is
dominated  from   time "to  time  by  the  passage,  often  under
armed  escort, of  some Vietnamese  VIP  in a  Peugot,  Mercedes-
Benz  or  Cadillac;  these  testify  to  how many  people  do  quite
well  on  the  war.
The  Overflow  from  The  PX
Most  of  the  people's   daily  life  seems  to  be  spent   in  the
streets.    On  the  crowded  sidewalks,  capitalism  is  in  flower.
Half  the  population  of  Saigon  seems  to  have  set  itself  up  in
business   with   items   from   the   American  PX.    Everywhere
there  are  tiny  stalls  selling  Gillette  razor  blades,  Spearmint
chewing  gum,  Almond  Joys,  Colgate  toothpaste,   Chesterfield
cigarettes  and   Hershey   bars   at   a   generous   markup.    So
large  an  outflow  from  the  PX  indicates  that  military   service
has  not  stifled  the  Yankee trader  spirit  in  our  troops.   Along
the  curb  and under  the  stalls mats are  spread  on which whole
families  lunch  and  dine;  the  food  is  cooked  on  a  tiny  brazier,
and  delicately  served  by  the  mothers.    The  meals,   mostly
seafood  stews  served  on  rice,  are  eaten  with  the  gusto  of  a
family  .picnic.    Everybody  seems  to  be  having  a  good  time,
from  the  children begging in the  streets to  the  shoeshine boys
showing  off  to  an  admiring  crowd  how  much  they  can  over-
charge  the  big barbarians  from  oversea.    In  the  endless   pag-
eantry  of the  streets, I  even  encountered one patriotic  demon-
stration.   Just  before  8  a.m.  on Nguyen  Hue street  I  was  at-
tracted  by a  crowd standing at  attention  while the  South  Viet-
namese  flag  was  raised  and  a  loud  speaker  broadcast  the  na-
tional  anthem.   When  the  ceremony  was  finished  the   crowd
filed into  the building.  It  was the headquarters  of the  General
Confederation  of  Employers.   This  evidence  of  a  renaissance
in  national  spirit  may  give  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  a   lift.
•   The  crew  of  the   Air  Vietnam  plane  on  which  I  flew  from
Hong  Kong  to  Saigon  was  entirely  Vietnamese.    Lunch  was
first  rate  French  Asian  cusine  with  good  French  wines.   The
stewardess  gave  me  my  first  glimpse  of  how  demurely  seduc-
tive   the   Vietnamese  woman's   costume   can  be:   delectably
feminine   loose  flowing  pants  as  the  undergarment,   usually
white,  with  a  kind  of  split  sari  over  it  of  contrasting   color.
It  is  the  direct  opposite  of  the  strip  tease.   The  girl  is  com-
pletely  covered  from  throat  to  feet,  not  even  the  ankles  are
visible.   Yet as  the  girl  moves the flowing garments  suddenly
mold  and  reveal  the  figure  for  a  fleeting  intimate   moment.
The    moving   limbs   provide   a   constant,   spontaneous   and
luminous  ballet.
The  civilian  arrival   hall  of  the  airport   at   Saigon  was  a
huge  shed  of  wood  and  tin,  almost  furnace-like  in  its   suffo-
cating   heat.     When  I   finally   got   away   .in   an   Air   Viet-
nam  bus, the  sky  was  a  luscious pale  blue with  tufts  of  white
cloud  but  the  scene  below  was  hot  and  dusty.   April,  before
the   monsoon   rains   begin,   is   Saigon's   hottest   and   driest
month.   I  saw  no  signs  of  the  mortar  attack  on  the  airport
a  few  days  earlier.    It  must  have  been  in  a  distant   corner
of  that  huge  airport.    There  was  a  big  unpainted  restaurant
with  a  billboard  in  French  advertising  the  first  dentifrice  of
the  Republic  with  "fluor".    Other  billboards  as  we  sped  by
advertised  the  Lambretta  scooter,  GM's  Cadillacs  and  Chev-
rolets,  and  Pan  Am.'  We  passed   villas   taken   over  by  the
military.    Sandbag  embankments  were  visible  behind  their
low  white  walls.   Sonie  of  the  villas  were  as  big  as  palaces.
We  went  over  a  bridge  and  caught  a  glimpse  of  dark  un-
painted  shacks  high  on  stilts  along  a  river  bank  as  far   as
one  could  see.    Near  them,  set  back  from.the  water,  were
white  and  pink  stucco  villas  with  gardens  behind  high  white
walls.   The  rich  and  the  poor,  seemed  to  live  almost  side  by
side  in  this  neighborhood.
At  the  hot  dusty  freight  shed  which  is  Saigon's  air  termi-
nus,  a  taxi  driver  made  a  deal  with  me—the  newly. arrived
sucker—  for  200 piastres  to  the  Hotel  Caravelle,  or  10 times
the  normal  price.    Then  he  strode  off  in  lordly  satisfaction,
leaving  me  to  handle  my  bags.    Several  eager  urchins  seized
them  despite  my  effort  to  explain  in  French  and  English  that
Freedom  of  Assembly  in  Saigon
"Saigon,  April  24—Eight  persons  were  arrested  Sat-
urday  night  at  a  house  on  Alley  III, Phu  Tho  street,  on
charges  of  holding  an  illegal  meeting.   The  purpose  of
their  meeting  was  unknown."
—Saigon  Daily  News, April  25
I  had  no  cash.    When  I  got  into  the  miniature  cab  and  left
them  empty  handed, I  was  treated  to  a  pantomime  of  pained
indignation  and  an  outburst  of  grandiloquent  Vietnamese  by
the  budding  entrepeneurs  until  my  lordly  driver  handed  out
two  5-piastre  bills  to  quiet  down  the  demonstration.    At  the
Caravelle,  only  a  few  blocks  away,  I  learned  that  my  tele-
graphic  confirmation  of  a  reservation  was  worthless.    I  soon
discovered  that  the  Caravelle  was  inhabited  by  phantoms.    I
had  the  names  of  half  a  dozen  persons  to  see,  all  presumably
at  the  Caravelle,  and  all  equally  unknown  to  the   manage-
ment.   I  did not  learn  until  later  that  every  room  there  was
acquired  only  by  intricate  bribery;  the  lucky  few  who  have
rooms  are  forced  to  treat  the  management  as  a   pampered
mistress;  one day  asked  to  bring  expensive film from  the  PX,
another  day  some  choice  foodstuff.    The  only  exception   was
A.  J.  Muste  and  his  CNVA  delegation  which  got  a  big  room,
perhaps  because  it  was  conveniently wired  for  sound  by  the
police  and  they  preferred   to  have  the  pacifists  where   they
could  keep  a  close  watch   on  their  comings  and  goings.    I
soon  was   sent   off  to  what   I  was  assured  was   a  modern
air-conditioned  hotel.    The  room  at  the  Federal  turned  out  to
have  a  broken  down  fan  and  a  shower  which  never  once  in
my  eight  day  stay  had  hot  water.
A  Moment  of  Apprehension
Saigon,  as  I  emerged  on  it  that  Sunday  afternoon,   must
have  been  a  lovely French  Asian  capital  before  the  war  with
its  broad  tree-lined  boulevards,  open  squares  and  shady  ar-
cades.    Now  it  seemed  an  Asiatic  honky  tonk.    Though   it
was  siesta  time,  here  and  there  U.S.  soldiers  in  pairs  saun-
tered  dolefully  past  the  many  bars  looking  like  Bill  Mauldin
types  in  search  of  an  ersatz  Marna.   Small  boys  were  already
out  pimping  in  the  hot  afternoon,  hinting  in  pidgin  English
at  bizarre  pleasures.    The  immemorial  entrepeneurial  spirit
flourished  in  the  world's  oldest  commodity,  women,  but  the
soldiers  seemed  too  shy  to  close  such  deals  in  broad  daylight.
Warding  off importunate  pedicab  drivers  I  made  straight  for
the  big  white  building  at   Nguyen  Hue  street  and  Le  Loi
boulevard  which  is  the  center  of  journalistic  activity  in   Sai-
gon—JUSPAO,  the   Joint   U.S.   Public   Affairs    Office,   on   a
square   adjoining  the  white  walled  palace   of  Saigon's  City
Hall.   JUSPAO  is  surrounded  by  a  barricade,  with  a  guard
house  at  either  end.    I  got  by  one  of  them  only  to  find  the
main  entrance  locked.   As  I  walked  from  one  locked  door  to
another,  alone  behind  that  white-washed  barricade,  one  lone
American  in  full  view  of  the  promenading  Sunday   crowds,
I  felt  conspicuously  alone,  an  easy  tempting  target  for  any
potshot  from  a  VC sympathizer.    That  was  my  one  moment
of  apprehension.    Soon  one treats  the  chance  of  being  hit  by
a  bomb in  Saigon  as  matter-of-factly  as  the  chance  of  an  auto
accident  in  the  States.
Fortunately   one  locked  side  door  was  soon  opened  for  me
by  a  lonesome duty  officer.    I  was  greeted   inside  by  a  huge
picture" of  Lyndon  Johnson,   looking  in  that  setting  almost
Orientally  inscrutable.    Next  to  the  picture  was  a  sign  in
English   and  Vietnamese   saying   peremptorily,  "Clear   your
weapon  before  going  topside."    When  I  asked  the  duty  of-
ficer  what  clearing   one's   weapon  meant,  he  said  it   meant
taking   any  live  bullets  out  before  going  upstairs  but  that
actually  the  order  had  been  superseded  by  a  later one simply
requiring  all  weapons  to  be  left  below.   I  was  heartened  by
this  sign  of  progress.
Before   being   permanently   accredited    as   an   American
correspondent,   one  has   to   obtain   a   press   card   from   the
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  9,1966
South  Vietnamese government.  This  is  the  sole  act  of  defer-
ence   to   Vietnamese  sovereignty   required   of   the   visiting
American.   The  contrast  between the  two  press  HQs reflects
the  real  balance of  forces.   JUSPAO  has  taken  over  a  multi-
storied  elegant  white  building  on  one  of  the  town's  most  im-
portant   squares.     The  ARVN  press   office   is  housed  in   a
nearby  second story  loft,  dark,  grimy  and  cooled only  by  an
old-fashioned  fan.   A  press  card  is  issued  without  question,
and  for  most  U.S. correspondents that  one visit  to. the  loft  is
all they will  make during their  tour of duty.  A formal military
press  briefing  is  held  there  at  4:30  p.m. each  day, a  half  hour
before  the  daily  briefing  at  JUSPAO,  but  only  a  few  wire
service  men,  on  days  when  they  are  hungry  for  news,  turn
up.    The  military  briefing   officer   speaks  in  Vietnamese  but
often  interrupts  his  interpreter  to  correct  the  latter's  some-
times  incomprehensible English.
An  American  Oasis
Back   across   the   street,   in  the   air-conditioned   realm  of
JUSPAO,  with  its   snack  bar,  its  PX  and—like  oases—its
clean  water  fountains,  the  American  finds  himself,  as  the
French   say,  chez  lui,  at   home.    The  newcomer,  even  if  a
stray  heretic  like myself,  encounters that unpretentious  amia-
bility  which is  the  most  attractive  and  democratic side  of  our
American  character.   I  had failed  to bring  the  required  letter
from  one's  editor  but  after  some good-humored joshing  from
a  press  officer  who  told  the  military  I  was  chief  cook  and
bottle-washer   of  my  own  publication,  my  card  was   issued.
I  was  also  asked  to  sign  a  form  absolving  the  U.S.  govern-
ment  from  liability  if  anything  happened  to  me  while  riding
in  a  military  plane.    During  the  eight  days  I  was  in  Saigon
I  met  with  nothing  but  courtesy  from   U.S.  officers,   civilian
or  military.    The  question   in  my  mind  was  how  so  many
well-meaning,  friendly  and  intelligent  people,  with  so much
in  the  way  of  funds  and  Vietnamese  informers  at  their  dis-
posal,  could  guess   so  consistently   wrong   about  events   in
Vietnam.  Honolulu, and its  aftermath  of  anti-American  riots,
were  only  the  latest  examples  of  this  incomprehension.    I
would  like  to  sketch  out  a  tentative   answer  on  the  basis  of
what  I  saw  and  heard.
The  first  thing  that  strikes  one is  the  extent  to  which  the
Americans  in  Vietnam  live  in  enclaves—not  just   military
but   psychological   enclaves.    JUSPAO,   the   Embassy,   the
various  AID  missions  and  the  military  HQs  in  Saigon   are
like  miniature  fortresses   in  a  hostile  land.    They  reminded
me  strongly  of  the  sand-bagged  and  barricaded   offices  of  the
British  in their  conflict  with  Israel's  Haganah  and the  terror-
ists  in  the  three  turbulent   years   before  Britain   withdrew
from  Palestine  in  1948.    But  these  fortresses  are  vulnerable
from  within;  they  depend  on Vietnamese  employes  and  there
is  no certain  way  to  distinguish  friend  from  foe.   The  situa-
tion  must  be  apple  pie  for  the  Viet  Cong  intelligence.   Our
press  and  our  soldiers  live  in  a  world  apart;  few  speak  even
such  bad  French  as  mine,  much  less  Vietnamese.    The  men-
tality  we develop is  the  compound  complex which  has  always
afflicted  foreigners  living  as  traders  or  soldiers  in  a  foreign
land.    We bring  America  with  us  wherever  we  go,  and  live
wrapped  in  a  kind  of  cellophane which  separates  us  from  the
people  of  the  country.    Our  relations  with  them  are  almost
entirely  mercenary,   and  the  women,  the  informers   and  the
soldiers  we buy are  about  as  unsatisfactory   as  bought  love  is
everywhere.   They  must  secretly  regard  us  with  amusement
or contempt.
To  watch  the  young  Ivy  Leaguers  arriving  briskly  at  the
Embassy  of  a  morning  is  to  feel  oneself   on  the  eve  of  the
Harvard-Yale   game.    The  team   spirit  is  bursting  out  all
over;   it   demands   optimism;   patriotism    is   equated   with
euphoria.    All  is  for  the  best,  albeit  not  in  the  best  of  all
possible  worlds.   One  day  the  official   spokesman  is   enthusi-
astic about the firing of General Thi  as  a  move against  "war-
lordism".    When  Thi's  removal  turns  out  to  be  a  bad  mis-
take,  the  same  spokesman  discovers  that  these  are  just  the
birth  pangs  in  South  Vietnam  of  "Federalism",  the  problem
5 *
The  Pinch  on  the  Poor
"Saigon,  April  12—Prices  in  the  capital  have  again
taken  a  jump,  this  time  as  a  result  of  the  early  curfew
brought  on by the  disturbances here, a  vernacular news-
paper  reported  today.    Among  the  foodstuffs  included
in  the  price  hike  have  been  rice,  fish,  meat  and  vege-
tables,  according  to  the  daily  'Chinh  Lnan'.   A  ten  kilo
bag  of  the  lowest  quality  rice  has  risen  from  300  to
500  piastres,  river  fish  have  risen  from  60  to  100  pi-
astres  and  meat  has  gone  up  a  couple  of  piastres  per
kilo."                                —Saigon  Daily  News,  April  IS
of  integrating  each  region  into  the  national  whole.    He  even
touches  on  the  U.S.   Civil  War  until  a  tart  newsman   sug-
gests  there  are  enough  civil  wars  going  on  in  South  Viet-
nam   without  rehashing  the  problem  of  the   Gray   and   the
Blue.   Everything  is  public  relations  and  public  relations  is
make-believe.    Every  top  official  is  more  concerned  with  his
"image"  than  with  unpleasant  realities.    To  mention  these
is  to  get  off  the  team.    Bright  gimmicks  are  turned   into
speeches  and  proliferate  into  pamphlets  long before  anything
has  been  accomplished  or  even  after  hopes  have   collapsed.
The  word  is  taken  for  the  deed.   As  one moves  from  talking
to  the  men who work  in the field to those  who work in  Saigon
and  then  think  of  the  men  in  Washington,  one  sees  that  the
further  from  the  scene  the  more  imaginary  the  picture  we
have  created.   The  most  confining  enclave  of  all  is  this  en-
clave  in  our  heads.
Animosity  and Arrogance
Under  the   supposed  benevolence  of  our  policy   one  soon
detects  a  deep  animosity  to  the  Vietnamese  and a  vast  arro-
gance.    We  assume  the  right  to  remold  them,  whether  they
choose  to  be  remolded  or  not.    The  war,  like  the  cold   war,
has   developed  a  vein  of  zealotry   alien   to  the   easy-going
American  character.   An  enthusiastic  psychological   warrior,
anxious  to  impress  me,  took  me  out  for  a  drink  on  the  cool
veranda   of  the  Continental   Palace;  one  could  imagine  how
the  French  planters  and  civil  servants  must  have  gathered
there  in  the  afternoons   for  their  aperitifs.    My  new  found
friend—he  claimed  to  know  all  about  me—told  me  that  in
working  with  captured  VC he  found  that  95%  were  "recov-
erable"  human  beings.    It  was  my  first  evening  and  I  did
not  dare  repay  his  hospitality  by  asking  what  we  did  with
the  other  5%—dispose  of  them  like  Kleenex?    Directives  go
down  from  on high  to  treat  the  villagers  with  some  discrimi-
nation.   But  the  poor  GI's one encounters  are  too full  of rage
at  the  fate   which  has  brought  them   there.    A  boy  from
Mobile  told  me  50%  of  the  people  in  Saigon  were  VC, 45%
indifferent  and  5%  with  us;  he  thought  we  ought  to  go  all-
out  to  win  the  war—smash  Hanoi—or  go  home.   His  buddy
from  Minnesota  said  at  first  he had  been  afraid  all  the  time.
He  described  the  sleepless  nights  in  the  jungle,  the  stink of
the  water.   Now he  had  become  a  fatalist;  he  felt  he  might
get  it  anywhere,  so why worry?    Terrorism  is  hard  to  take,
to  see a buddy blown up  by a  mine or knocked  off by a  sniper
hardly   makes   one  benevolent   to  the  natives.    One  hears
frightful  stories  of  troops  in  the  field setting  fire  to  villages
or,  on  evacuating  them,  defecating  in  the  cooking  utensils,
out  of  sheer  hate  and  resentment.
In  Saigon,  on R  and R  (rest  and recreation), the  bar  girls
gyp  the  troops with  the  skill  of their  sisters in  the  clip  joints
of   Greenwich  Village.    A  soldier  can  spend  a  month's  pay
on  "Saigon  tea"   and  emerge  as  virgin  as  he  entered.   The
soldiers feel  that they  are  taken  advantage  of on every  hand,
and  they  are.    I  heard  a  burly  sergeant  explode  one night
at  the  Caravelle  when  he found, as usual, that  advance  reser-
vations  had  been  ignored.   "We're  out  there  in  the  jungle
trying to hold this country together," he shouted angrily,  "and
this  is  what  we get  for  it."   There  is  hardly  benevolence  in
the words  one hears so frequently  at  the  daily military  brief-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
6    /
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone'8  Weekly,  May 9,1966
{Continued  from  Page  Three)
ing—"search  and  destroy"—as  if  we  were  an  Old   Testament
God.     In   the   cool  panelled   classroom   in   which   the   brief-
ings  are  held,   the  only  theory  of  the  war  which  seems   to
emerge  is  implied  by  the  "kill  count"   as  if  we  were  on  an
insect  extermination mission  and  could  go  home  when  all  the
termites  had  been  destroyed.    It  is  significant that  those  like
Gen.  Lansdale  and  Colonel  John  Paul  Vann  who  would  ap-
proach  the  Vietnamese  as  people  soon  find  themselves  side-
tracked,   suspect   and   frustrated.    The   machine  instinctively
reacts  against  the  human,  and  what  we  are  running,  or  what
is  running  us,  is  a  bureaucratic war  machine.
All  Is  Forgiven  the  Machine
Americans  with  cameras  search  out  VC  atrocities  with  in-
dignation,  but  the  use  of  napalm  and  saturation  bombing  is
regarded  merely as  another  form  of  technology.    The  machine
is  forgiven  atrocities  many-fold  more  terrible  than  those  of
the   guerrillas.     The   Vietnamese   are   expendable.     I   came
across  cold  warriors  who  operated  in  Germany,  in  Bolivia,  in
Brazil  and  in  Santo  Domingo  and  now,  in  all  innocence,  com-
mit  similar  follies  in  Vietnam.    They  place  a  very  high  value
on  the  purity  of  their  intentions  and  a  very  low  estimate  on
the  motivations  of   the  Vietnamese.    One  old   acquaintance
gave  me  a  briefing  on  all  we  were  doing  for  the  Vienamese
and   then   dropped   remarks  which   revealed   a  very   different
attitude.    The  editors  in  Saigon,  who  have  been  asking   for
freedom  of  the  press,  called  a  one-day  general  strike  to  pro-
test  an  attack  on  a  pro-government  editor  (the  military  could
hardly  object  to  that)   but  appended   to  this  a  demand   for
greater  press  freedom.    When  I  asked  my  friend  about  this,
he  said  cynically,   "they   only  wanted  to  save  a  day's  news-
print."    Yet  he  had  been  telling  me we  were  there  to  protect
democracy  from  communism.    Every  demand  for  democratic
rights  is  regarded  as  perverse  if  not  subversive; this  is  also  the
basic  attitude  toward  elections.    One  often   feels  our  people
regard  the  Vietnamese  as  irrelevant  to  our  world-wide  holy
war  against  Communism.   As  my  friend  said,  "After  all  it's
only  an  accident that this was  is being  fought  here.    We  have
to  smash the  idea  of  wars of  liberation."    If  Vietnam  and  the
Vietnamese  are  badly  battered   in  the  process,   it's  too  bad.
The  growing  awareness  of  this  essential  indifference  to  their
You  Can't   Even  Trust  the  Lilies
"Around  Da  Nang  a   patrol   from   the  9th   Marines
Regiment  captured  one  Viet  Cong  hiding  in  a  bunker.
Near  Tu  Cau  II  village,   another   patrol  from  the  9th
Marines  spotted   four   VC  camouflaged   with  lily   pads
crossing  the  Vinh  Dien  River.    The  Marines,  firing  at
the  swiftly   moving  lily   pads,   killed  three   of  the  Viet
Cong.    The  fourth   VC,  dripping  wet   in  his   lily   pad
costume,   surrendered   to  the  Marine  patrol."
—Official    MACV   (Military    Advisory   Command   Viet-
nam)   communique  No.  107-66,  17  April.
fate  is  giving  the  Vietnamese  a  common  despair  that  might
some  day  prove   stronger  even   than  fratricidal   passion.
The  Urge  to  Be  "Constructive"
Our   capacity   for   overlooking   the   obvious  is   enormous.
Even  one  of  the  best  and   most  independent  reporters   here
was  shocked   by  the  anti-Americanism  of   reeent   demonstra-
tions  in  Saigon  and  in  Hue  and  Danang.    He  shares  the  naive
view  that  we  are there  to  help  the  Vietnamese  and  regards  the
demonstrations  as  sheer  ingratitude.   The  simple  fact  that  oc-
cupying  armies,  whether  allied  or  enemy,  always  become  un-
popular  hardly  ever  figures  in  official   calculation.    It  would
be  too  hard  to  reconcile  it  with  the  planned  steady  increase  in
the  number  of  troops.    This,  in  a  country  as fiercely national-
istic  as  Vietnam,  spells  more  trouble  of  the  same  kind  but  to
face  the  facts  might  force  us  to  recast  our  policy.    An  experi-
enced  British  correspondent   told  me  that  several  months  ago
he  raised  with  a  U.S.   official   the  resentment   and  annoyance
created   by  the   influx  of  foreign   troops,  with  the  money  to
get  first  choice  of  everything  from  women  to  pedicabs.     He
predicted   that   urban   unrest   might   prove   worse   than   the
trouble  in  the  villages.    He  was  told  he  ought  to  try  and  be
more   "constructive."
A  group  of  Buddhist  neutralists  of  whom  I  shall  tell  more
in  my  next  letter  published  a  volume  in  French
(
  and  English
called  Dialogue.    In  one  of  them  Pham  Cong  Thien  writes,
"Here  is  my  Nada   prayer:  Lead  us  not  into  Salvation,   but
deliver  us  from   Deliverance."     This  is  the  true  cry  of   the
heart  from  a  country  torn  apart.
Next  week:  How  the  Vietnamese  Feel  About
The  War
Why  Not  Start  A  Gift  Sub With  This,  the  First  of  Three  On-the-Spot  Reports  from  Vietnam  and   Cambodia
IE  Stone's Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
5/9/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:'
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    .......................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
IPS  Will  Speak  on  His  Trip  at  the  Peace  Rally,  Washington  Monument  2  p.m.,  May  15
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED