I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966apr04.pdf

============================================================

"Instant''  Myths  and  the Dominican  Revolt, P.  3
Maybe  We  Ought  To  Bomb  Saigon  Instead  of  North  Vietnam
"Saigon  is  a  special  problem.  .  .  .  You  can  buy  almost
anything  you  want  on  the  black  market, cigarettes,   liquor,
almost  any  item  the  Americans  ship  over  here.    How  the
supplies   get   from   the   U.S.   military   outlets  to  the  black
market's  stalls  seems  to  be  one  of  the  mysteries  of   Saigon.
Nobody  wants  to  talk  about  it.    Observation  by  a  U.S.  offi-
cial:  'We  could  knock a  lot  of  the  wind out  of  the  Viet  Cong
by  throwing  a  really  tight  blockade  around  Saigon  .  .  .  it's
a  big  supply  center  for  the  Communists.    We  hold  it.    We
run  it.    But  they  can  get  anything  they  want  on  the  black
market   here:   medicine,   clothing,    food,   flame-throwers—
you  name  it'."
-White  House  Correspondent John  P.  Sutherland,  on  a  visit  to  Vietnam,  m  U.S.  News  &  World  Report,  April  4.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.  XIV,  NO.  13APRIL  4,  1966
WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Jeffersonianism  for  Export  Only
It  is  good  to  know  that  a  committee  of  the  House  of  Rep-
resentatives  has  been  privately  investigating  secret  police  prac-
tices.     And   that,   in  the   course  of   its  inquiry,  it  has  now
reported  on  the  methods used  for  the  surveillance of  travellers.
"Everybody  who  enters  ................................................  as  a  tourist,  busi-
nessman,  or  official  delegate,"  it  is  disclosed  in  a  report  this
committee  made  March   17,  "falls   under   control   of   XXX
agents,   surveillance,   telephone   monitoring,   hidden    micro-
phones,  letter  censorship,  etc."    These  official  disclosures  are
given  additional weight  because  they  appeared  in  the  first  re-
port  ever  published   by  a  10-year  old  House  Armed   Services
subcommittee whose very existence has  been  unpublicized until
now.     It  is  a  subcommittee  on  the  CIA.
The  Mote  In  Our  Own  Electronic   Eye
Lest  we  raise  the  hopes  of  our  readers  too  high,  we  hasten
to  add  that  the  report  did  not  deal  with  the  surveillance by
U.S.   Embassies  of  Americans  travelling  abroad.    The   XXX
agency  in  the  quotation   above  was  neither  the  CIA  nor  the
FBI  but  another  three-letter  spy  agency,  the  AVH,  of  Hun-
gary,  the  country  the  report   dealt  with.    But  the  mentality
and  methods  are  so  similar  that  we  hope  some  time  a  com-
mittee  of  Congress,  especially  one  supposed   to  exercise  sur-
veillance  (if  the  CIA  will pardon  the  expression)  over one of
our  own  secret  'police  agencies  may  turn  its  attention  to  the
methods  used  by our  government  to  shadow  Americans travel-
ling  abroad  and  foreigners  travelling  here.    The  witness   in
the   Hungarian   report,   a   former   AVH-man   named   Laszlo
Szabo,  defected  after  shameful  experience  opened  his  eyes  to
the  evils of  a  system relying for  security on  a  secret  police  net-
work  which  shadows  those  suspected   of   being   in  disagree-
ment  with  it.    Some  day  a  U.S.  secret  police  agent,  taught  by
his  experiences  to  see  the  virtues  of  a  free  and  open  society
without  listening  devices,  may  defect  here  and  be  willing  to
tell  his story, if  like  Mr.  Szabo he  were promised  asylum.   We
wonder  whether,   among  the  thousands  of  men  in  our  own
vast  underground   of   intelligence   agencies,   a   Congressional
committee   could   not   find   one   or   two   disillusioned   agents
closer  home  than  Budapest  if  it  were  really  interested.
It  is  no  accident  that  Congressional  committees  save  their
indignation  over  secret  police  practices  to  those  which  take
place  5,000  miles  away.    We  take  for  granted   at  home  the
Snoopery   Unlimited
Q.  You  said  that  this   [surveillance  of   U.S.   citizens
abroad]  has  been  a  practice  for  30 years. ...  Is  there
any  legal  authority  for  it?
A.  I  frankly  can't   answer  that.  .  .  .
Q.  There  are  an  awful  lot  of  investigative  agencies
in  this  town.    Does  this  policy  mean  that  any  investi-
gative  agency  can  forward  an  inquiry  to  the  State  De-
partment  and  that  inquiry  can  be  then  used  as  a  check
on  any  American  citizen  abroad  to  institute  a  check  on
his  activities  abroad?
A.  In  this   present   context,   the   answer   to   that   I
would  presume  to  be yes. ...
Q.  Well,   are   there    any   standards,   any   objective
standards,  as  distinguished  from  opinions  held  perhaps
by  individual  officials   as  to   what   would  constitute  a
proper  frame  of  reference   for  decisions  to  send  such  a
report  abroad,  or  should  it  be  assumed  that  all  Amer-
ican  citizens   who  travel   abroad  may  be  subjected   to
surveillance   on   the   decisions   of   some   secret   agency
within  the  Government?
A.  I  don't  think   that   there  is  an  absolute  criterion
that  could  be  applied.
—Press  Conference,  State  De-pi.,  March  24  with  As-
sistant  Secretary  Robert  J.   McCloskey.
Big  Brotherism  we  deplore  on  the  other  side.    We  think  it
dreadful  that  men  should  be  penalized  there  on  mere  suspi-
cion  of  pro-capitalist  leanings.    But  it  is  amazing  how  many
here  take  it  for  granted   that  when   Harvard   Professor   H.
Stuart  Hughes,  the  distinguished   grandson   of   Chief   Justice
Charles  Evans  Hughes,   goes  abroad  he  should   be  shadowed
because  (in  the  fractured  English  of  our  semi-literate  sleuths)
he  "reportedly   in  the  past  has  had  strong  convictions  toward
Communism."     Precisely  what  this  gibberish   means  must  be
left  to  the  FBI  man  who  wrote  it  and  the  State   Department
officials  who  forwarded  it  to  U.S.   Embassies.    But  even  so
normally  civilized  a  conservative   paper  as  the  Washington
Evening  Star  defends  its  propriety.    "This  sort  of  surveillance
of  citizens  -is  necessarily  maintained  in  the  United  States,"  it
said  in  an  editorial  March  28,  "and  the  fart  that  a  citizen may
be  travelling  abroad  should  not  confer  a  special  immunity  on
him."    Our  country  has  drifted  very  far  from  its  free  begin-
nings when  a leading  newspaper  unblushingly  asserts  that  such
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  4,1966
Role   of   the   Poor   Ignored   by   House   Education  and   Labor  Committee
Not  One  Representative  of  the  Poor  at  This  Year's  Poverty  Hearings
By  Peter   Osnos
In  the  House  Education  and  Labor  Committee  hearings  on
the  first  full  year  of  the  poverty program,  the  role  of  the  poor
in   developing  local  programs  was  all  but   ignored.     "Maxi-
mum  feasible  participation" was  supposed  to  be  a  basic precept
of  the  program,  but  not  one  representative  of  the  poor  was
invited  to  appear.    The  testimony of  non-controversial Negro
ministers  and  the  Executive  Director  of  the  National   Council
of  Negro  Women   were  offered   as  substitutes.   For  most  of
the  eight  sessions,  the  committee was  treated  to  optimistic re-
ports   from   Administration   officials   and,   among   others,   the
President  of  Litton  Industries, the  Chairman of  the  Board  of
General   Electric,  the  Chairman  of   the   Board  of   the   Hotel
Corporation  of  America  and  Arkansas Governor  Orval  Faubus.
By  way  of  contrast,  witnesses  last  year  included  the  Rev. Lyn-
ward  Stevenson  of   Saul  Alinsky's  Woodlawn  project;   Cecil
Moore,  the  militant  leader  of  the  Philadelphia  NAACP  and
Martin   Luther  King.     Statements   by  Tom   Hayden   of   the
Students  for  a  Democratic Society and  by several other radicals
were  accepted  for  the  record.
More  Powell   Demagogy
At  Chairman  Adam Clayton  Powell's direction, the  focus  of
this  year's  hearings  was  unemployment.    "Many  of  the  cul-
tural  and   social  frills  of   the  war  on  poverty  should  be  cut
out,"  Powell  told  the  Office  of  Economic Opportunity  in  Janu-
ary,  "All  we  need  are  jobs,  just  jobs."     To  Labor  Secretary
Willard  Wirtz,  Powell  said,  "Manpower   programs   have  no
excuse  for  dragging  their  heels  and  idly  contemplating  their
research  navels  while  the  poor  stay  unemployed."    Job  train-
ing  and  placement  are,  obviously  of  the  utmost   importance.
On  the  other  hand,  Powell,  who  missed many of  the  hearings,
should  not  have  waited  until  they  were  over  to   reaffirm   his
commitment  to  "maximum  feasible  participation."    His  threat
to  scuttle  the  poverty  war  if  Mayors  are  given  veto   powers
over   local  programs  (UPI  Audio,  March  27)   seems  like  a
belated  bit  of   demagogy.
OEO  contends  discussion  of  "maximum  feasible  participa-
Where  LBJ   Economizes
"We  are  especially  distressed  by  the  substantial   cuts
in  various  education  program  budgets  submitted  by  the
Administration.  .  .  . The proposed  cuts  in  (the  impacted
areas   school   aid  program)   very   nearly   offset   the   in-
creased   aid   to   education   provided  by   the   1965   ele-
mentary  and  secondary  education bill.  .  .  .  We  hope  the
committee  will  appropriate sufficient   funds  to  meet  at
least   the   present  authorizations  for  vocational   educa-
tion.    The  1967  budget  requests   some   $69  million  less
than  the  amounts authorized.   This  is  yet  another  con-
trast  between  promise  and  performance."
—-Andrew  J.  Biemiller  on  behalf   of  AFL-CIO   to  the
House  Appropriations   Committee, March  24.
tion"  is  no  longer  necessary.    "It   is  an  accomplished   fact,"
said  one  OEO   official.     Statistics  proudly  displayed  at   OEO
show  several  thousand  poor  people  serving  on  local  poverty
boards.     The   statistics   don't   show,  however,   that   in  many
cities,  including  Chicago  and  Los  Angeles,  the  poor  continue
to  be  denied  any  authority.
The  real  reason  for  soft-pedaling   "maximum  feasible   par-
ticipation,"   OEO   staffers   and   Congressional  aides   privately
admit,  is that  "there  are  many  members of  the  committee  who
don't  particularly  care  for  the  concept.    Many  of  them  would
like  to  see  it  out  of  the  bill  altogether."    Even  some  commit-
tee  liberals  have  expressed  concern  over  the   impact   a  well-
organized  poor  could  have  on  the  status  quo  in  their  districts.
The   Community  Action  Programs—once  described   as  the
"prime  offensive  in  the  war  on  poverty"—are  bound  to  suffer
as  a result  of  the  attitude of  OEO  and  Congress.    The   essence
of  the  CAPs  is  full  participation of  the  poor  in  activities rang-
ing  from  rent  strikes  to  caring for  the  elderly.    Although  650
CAPs  are  now  in  operation,  barely  10%   of  the  nation's   32
million  poor   have  been  reached.    In  spite  of  this,  OEO  has
recommended   that   program   development   funds—the   "seed
money"  used  by  local  agencies  to  organize  community  action
programs—be  cut from  $18  million  to  $6  million.   The  CAPs
are  in  danger  of  strangulation. The  politicoes   fear  the  poor.
Insights  at  Random: How  Johnson  Tried  to
"Hechscher"  is   the  seal   which  certifies   that   meats   are
kosher.    Johnson  sought  the  seal  on  the  Vietnamese  war  by
secret  talks  in  Bangkok  with  certain  Israeli    representatives.
The  idea  was  for  Israeli  soldier-advisers  to  help  the   South
Vietnamese  military develop  "Nahal"  fighter-settler  colonies
like  those  in  Israel.    The  idea  was  nonsense  since  the  Nahal
were  imbued  with  tremendous  zeal  in a struggle for  national
rebirth  and  survival.    No   military   dictatorship,   especially
an  Asian  one  wholly  dependent  on  a  white  imperial  power,
could  hope  to  generate   such  elan.    But  it  would  have  been
a  great  publicity  stunt   for  Johnson   and  the  war.     Fortu-
nately  it  leaked  to  Milton  Friedman  of  Jewish   Telegraphic
Agency   in  Washington.     His   stories   created   a   storm   in
Israel  and  the  Israeli  government  had  to  deny  any  such  in-
tention.  .,.  .  Even  in  West  Germany,  participating  in  the
Viet  war  is  unpopular; more  than  90%  voted  against  it  in  a
German  public opinion poll.  .  .  .  What  Owen  Lattimore  said
at  Pembroke  College,  Providence,  March  28,  applies  to  the
whole  range  of  CIA  operations,   "we  know  everything  that
happens  in  China  but  not  a  thing  that's  going   on."    Our
preconceptions   undo  all  our  expensive  operations.    Even  the
Put  The  "Kosher"  Stamp  on  the  Viet  War
latest   electronic   gear   is  no  substitute  for  an  objective  and
sympathetic  mind.  .  .  .  Three  interlocking   fears   play   their
part  in  the  NATO  discussions.    One,  highly  advertised,  but
dwindling,  is  fear   of   Russia.     Another,  less  spoken   of  in
public  but  growing,  is  fear  of  Germany.   The  third,   which
our   other   allies   are   too   polite   to   mention,   but   French
Premier   Pompidou  touched  on  in  a  TV  interview  March  28,
is  fear  of  being   drawn  into  a  thermonuclear   war  by   U.S.
recklessness.  .  .  .  The  big  vote   for  the   ex-dictator   Rojas
Pinilla  in  the  Colombian  elections  may  serve  as  a  reminder
that  "democracy"  as  it  is  known  and practiced  in  most  Latin
American  countries  is  a  game  played  out  within  the  oligar-
chy  by  conventional  propertied  class  parties   with  no   real
concern  for  the  masses.    As  in  ancient  Rome,  Caesars  like
Peron  and  Rojas  Pinilla  appeal  over  the  heads  of  the   oli-
garchic   Republican  Patricians   to   the   proletariat,   offering
them  bread  and  circuses   in  return  for  giving   up  liberties
that  had  little  real  meaning  for  them  anyway.    That   way
is  the  road  to  corruption  and  degeneracy  but  it  can  only  be
countered  by  meaningful  social   politics  or  by  social   revo-
lution.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  4, 1906
How  Senator  Long  and  Wm.  S.  White  Distorted  the  the  Dominican  Revolution
Now  We  Have  "Instant"  Myths  As Well  As "Instant"  Coffee
In  the  ancient  world,  myths  developed   over  the   centuries.
In  the  modern  world,  they  can  spring  up  overnight.    Here  is
an  example,   from  last  week's   Congressional   Record,   dealing
with  the  Dominican  Republic.    We   begin  with   this  from   a
speech   on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  March   25:
Mr.  Long of  Louisiana.   In  yesterday's  Washington  Post,
Wm.  S.  White  presents   the  final  proof  of  the  part  played
by  the  Communists  in  the  violent  upheaval  in  the  Domini-
can  Republic  last  year.    He  does  it  by  the  simple  but  effec-
tive   method  of   quoting  from  the  boasts  now  being  pub-
lished  in  the  organs  of  the  international communist  move-
ment.    Two   members  of   the   executive  committee  of   the
Dominican   Communist   Party,   writing   in   the    magazine
World  Marxist  Review  .  .  .  are  blatantly  proclaiming  their
responsibility   for   the   uprising  and   .  •.  .  one   of   the   most
brazen   and   important   tactics   they   disclosed    was   their
allocation  of  their  armed  Communists throughout  the  com-
mands  involved  in  the   rebellion—as   soon   as  they   discov-
ered  that  their  concentration  made  them  a  target  for  our
criticism.
This  embellished   on  what  Mr.  White  wrote.    In  the  col-
umn,   as  -inserted   in   the   Record,   by   Senator   Long,   all   the
columnist  said  on  this  point  was:
Though  the  Communists were  not  able  at  its  start  fully
to  control  the  uprising  they  shortly  were  "allocating  armed
Communists"  to  revolutionary  commands  organized  block
by  block   in  Santo  Domingo.  .  .  .  Quelle  and  Conde  write
.  .  .  "At  first  we  combined  all  our  forces  in  a  single  com-
mand.    The  fallacy  of  this  decision  soon  made  itself   felt.
It  restricted,  on  the  one  hand  our  own  propaganda   (which
was  conducted  chiefly  among  our  own  members).    On  the
other  hand  this  command  became  the  target  for  attack  on
the   movement  by  the   imperialists.     Having  realized  our
mistake,  we  thereupon   allocated   armed   Communists   to  a
number  of   commands."
But  if  White  had  given  the  rest  of  that  paragraph  it  would
be  seen  that  this  was  not  a  device  to  control  the  revolt  but  to
break   out  of   isolation.     The   two  Communists   wrote   (Janu-
ary   1966,   World   Marxist   Review,  p.  .53)   —
We succeeded,  as  a result,  in making our line known to  the
armed  forces,   to  the   majority  of   the  participants  of   the
movement  who  did  not  belong  to  any  party,  winning  their
sympathy   and  ensuring   the   steady   growth  of   our  Party
and  the strengthening  of  the  popular resistance  as  a  whole.*
Indeed  if  Senator  Long  and  Mr.  White  had  read  the  first
installment  of  this  two-part  article  in  the  December  issue  of
the  same  review,   they  would   have  found  the  two  Communist
leaders   admitting   that   far   from   starting   the   revolution,   it
caught  them   by  surprise.     Senator   Clark   (D.,    Pa.)   put   the
first  installment   in  the  Record  along  with  the  White  column,
to  let  the  Senate  judge  the  distortions  for   itself:
Mr.  Clark.  .  .  .  Mr. White  chortles  that  in  the  article  the
* The  only  "block  by  block"  control  was  exercised,   accord-
ing  to  these  two  Communist  writers,  not  by  the  armed  Com-
munists  but  by  "so-called  'commandos'"  which  "were  organ-
ized  for  the  defense   of  the  city.    These  were military-poli-
tical  bodies  organized  at  the  height  of  the  struggle  by  poli-
tical  parties,  trade  unions  and  other  popular organizations  in
the  various  districts,  streets,  and  separate  buildings, and  act-
ing  within  their  particular  zone  as  organs  of  executive  power.
This  was  a  new  and  original form  of  people's  power.  Headed
by  those  who  displayed  the  most  courage  and organizational
ability  and  courage   in  the  fighting,  the   'commandos'  repre-
sented  a  wide  cross-section   of  the  population,  including  sol-
diers   and  civilians,   workers   and  students,   intellectuals   and
unemployed."                                 —P.  <U25, Con.  Rec.  March  25.
Goldberg  "Reversed"  by  Anthony   Eden
"Mr.   Arthur   Goldberg   is   reported  as   saying   to   a
press  conference   in  London,  'One  of  the  U.S.  objections
to  the  Geneva  settlement  was  that  the  United  Nations
had   not  been   given  a  larger  role.    The   U.S.   govern-
ment  felt  the  UN  should  have  been  asked  to  supervise
the  elections.'    To  the  best  of  my  recollection  no  such
criticism  was  ever  voiced by  any  U.S.  representative  at
Geneva  at  any  time  during the  four  months  which  the
Conference  lasted.    It  would  indeed  have  been  surpris-
ing  if  it  had,  since  a  reason  why  the  UN  could  not  be
more   closely   associated   with   the   Geneva  Conference
was  that  a  principal  member  of  the  Conference,  China,
was  not  a  member  of  the  UN.    The  leadership  in  re-
sisting  China's   membership  was   then  being  taken  by
the  United  States.    So  far  as  I  know  that  is  still  the
position.    It  would be  a  pity  if  confusion  about  the  past
were  to  add  to  the  already  sufficient   difficulties   in  find-
ing  a  solution  to  the  Vietnam war."
Lord  Avon  (Anthony   Eden)
—Letter  in  The  Times  (London)   March  16.
Communists  not  only  acknowledge but  boast  of  their  "deep
and  armed  complicity"   in  the   Dominican   revolt  of   April,
1965.     Thereby,  says   Mr.  White,  the   Communists  them-
selves  have  destroyed  the  case   of   the  critics  of  the   U.S.
intervention  in  the  Dominican  Republic.  .  .  .  [But]   in  the
h'rst   place  the  article  makes   it  clear  that   the  Dominican
Communists  had  nothing   to  do  with  organizing  or  inspir-
ing  the  April revolution.   Indeed,  the  authors  of  the  article
indulge   in   rather   severe   self-criticism    for   having   been
caught   napping.    "We  failed  to  see,"  they  write,  that  an
armed   uprising   was   inevitable.    Consequently  our   party
found  itself  unprepared for  the  uprising and  was  unable  to
head  it,  although  as  far  as  possible  it  took  a  firm  and  reso-
lute  part  in  it."  .  .  .  The  article  also  confirms, as  critics  of
the  Administration have  maintained—that  the  Communists
at   no  point  controlled   the   revolution.    It   even   criticizes
leadership  of  the  revolution as  being  "rightist."
Senator   Clark   called   attention  particularly  to  the  fact   that
the  article  reports  that  the   rebels   were   initially  confused  as
to  the  object   of  the   U.S.   intervention.    It  says:
Many  actually   believed   that  the   Americans  had  landed
for  the  purpose  of  protecting  the  people  from  Wessin's  air
attacks,  or  to  insure  the  return  of   Bosch.
"One   may note here,"  Senator  Clark  commented,  "the  great
depth  of  good  will  toward  the  U.S.  in  the  Dominican   Repub-
lic  and  the  propaganda   weapon  which  the  intervention  handed
the    Communists."
But  of  those  who  read  Mr.  White's  syndicated  column   not
one  in  10,000  will  see  Senator   Clark's  rebuttal  in  the   Con-
gressional  Record  or  the  Weekly.    The  truth  will  never   catch
up  to  the  myth.
A   similarly   distorted   use  of   the   Marxist   Review   articles
was  made  by  Selden  (D.,  Ala.),  chairman  of  the  House  sub-
committee  on  Latin  American  Affairs.    He  put  into  the  Record
on  March  2}  a  Los  Angeles  Times  column  by  Ernest  Conine,
"Now   the  Reds  Confirm  Dominican   Revolt  Role."    We  are  a
little  surprised   at  the  wide  circulation  given   this   rather   ob-
scure  Communist  journal.   We  do  not  wish  to  do  injustice  to
the  erudition  of  Long,  White,  Selden  and  Conine,  and  it  may
be  that  they  are  more  omnivorous  readers  than  we  give  them
credit  for.    But  the  CIA,  which  monitors  such  journals,   has
been  known   to  leak  stuff  this  way  before.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  4,1966
Revelations  in  the  Staughton  Lynd  Passport  Case The  Press  Blacked  Out
(Continued   from   Page   One)
police  state  practices  are  normal  at  home  in  order  to  defend
the   shadowing   of   citizens   abroad!     Merely   because  he   is
travelling  abroad,  as  the  Evening  Star  says,  "should  not  con-
fer  a  special  immunity  on  him."    This  is  exactly  how  Com-
munist  regimes  defend  the  surveillance of  those  citizens  they
allow   abroad.
The  Only  Free  People  Not  Free  To  Travel
We  are getting  to  be like one  of  those  poor  countries  whose
best  products   are  reserved   for   export   only.     Congress   and
most   of   the  press   can  be  rallied  with  Jeffersonian   passion
against  restrictions  on  the  civil  liberties  of  Hungarians.    But
at  home  our  bureaucrats  can  make  goulasch  of   the   Bill  of
Rights  without  noticeable  effect  on  Congressional  blood  pres-
sure.    Only  one  Senator,  Edward  M.  Kennedy  of  Massachu-
setts,  has  protested  the  orders  to  snoop  on  Prof.  Hughes,  and
in  a  sharp  letter  to  Secretary  Rusk  posed  a  series  of  questions
on  the  practice of  shadowing  U.S.  citizens  in  foreign  countries.
We  wait  to  see  what  kind  of  answer  it  elicits.    At  his  press
conference  last  Friday  Secretary  Rusk,  that  pillar  of  uncom-
promising  resistance  to  totalitarian practices from  Smolensk  to
Haiphong,  would  only  say under  questioning,  "I'm not  satis-
fied  that  our  present  procedures  are  exactly  what  they  ought
to  be."   Our  Secretary of  State's  utterances  are  in  no  danger
of  being  confused  with  Voltaire's.     The  Rusk  remark  was  a
gem  of  tepid  ambiguity.    But  even  the  little  bloc  of  liberals
in  Congress  has  yet  to  introduce a  bill  to  safeguard  the  right
to   travel,   a   bill   to   pull   down   the   McCarran-Walter   wall
which  denies  visas to  foreign  visitors with  radical  records  and
dismantle  the  little  Iron  Curtains  the  State  Department  im-
poses  on  countries  like  Cuba  whose  government   it  dislikes.
Americans  remain  the  only  people  of  the  "free  world"   not
free  to  travel  where they  please.    In  this we  are  more Musco-
vite  than   Anglo-Saxon.
Where  the  victim  of  bureaucratic practices  is  an  opposition-
ist  (as  they  say  in  Moscow),  the  press  shows  itself  almost  as
queasy  as  it  was  in  the  days of  McCarthy.   Nobody  asked  Sec-
retary  Rusk  about  the  new  revelations  in  the  Staughton  Lynd
passport  case  though  these  were  disclosed  to  the  press  the day
Dangerous  To  Let  Christians  Travel
"The  U.S.  should  lift  its  trade  embargo  on  Cuba and
re-evaluate  its  policies  toward  that  country,  the  Rev.
J.  Hugh  Anwyl  said  here  yesterday.  He recently  visited
Cuba.   The  Rev. Anwyl,  pastor  of  Mt.  Hollywood  Con-
gregational  Church,  Hollywood,  Calif.,  said  the  political
climate  was  changing  in  Cuba  and  the  U.S.  should  act
to  improve relations.    'Premier  Castro  is  re-evaluating
his  policy  toward China  and  I  imagine he  would  do  the
same   thing  regarding   Russia,'  the  Rev.  Anwyl  said.
'He  is  concerned  that  he  does  not  become  dependent  on
any  country.    I  think  Cuba  represents  a  microcosm of
the   confrontation   between   Christianity   and   Commu-
nism  and  I  feel  the  way  to  meet  the  challenge  is  not
to  present  Christianity  behind  battleships  or  trade  em-
bargoes.'   The  Rev. Anwyl  was here  to  speak  at  a  meet-
ing  of  the  executive  council  of   the   United  Church  of
Christ.    He  spent  a  week  in  Cuba  at  the  suggestion  of
his  congregation   to  'express  our  concern'  over  condi-
tions  that  ministers  endure  there.    He  is  from   Wales
and  a  British  subject.  . . . Rev. Anwyl  said  he had been
scheduled  to  participate  in  Easter  services  at  the  Holly-
wood  Bowl but  after  he  returned  from  Cuba  and  made
statements  about re-evaluating  the  U.S.  position  he had
been  informed  that  he  was  no  longer  scheduled  to  ap-
pear  at  the:services."
—St. Louis  Post-Dispatch, March 15.
before  after  a  closed  hearing  at  the  State  Department.     His
counsel,  David  Carliner,  acting  for  the  American  Civil  Lib-
,  erties  Union,  said  he  elicited  admissions from  Passport   Office
officials  that  they  had  sent  an  "investigator"   to  listen  in  on
Professor  Lynd's  talk  here  to  Women   Strike  for   Peace  and
take  note,  in  their  language,  of  any  "anti-American  remarks."
A  Passport   Office  attorney  admitted  that  his  passport  was  re-
voked  not  just  for  visiting  North  Vietnam  in  defiance  of  our
Iron  Curtain regulations but  for  the  kind  of  speeches  he  made
on  his  return.    Though  the  AP  put  Carliner's  disclosures on
its  wires,  no  metropolitan  paper  that  I  saw  except  the   Wash-
ington  Post  two  days later  carried  the  story.    This  silence  can
only  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  Lynd  is  not  considered  re-
spectable  enough  to -qualify  for  full  enjoyment  of  those  basic
liberties  we  so  yearn  to  confer  on  the  poor  Hungarians.
Index  for  1965 Ready  —    Send  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope  —    Renew  Your  Sub and  Send  A  Gift  Sub at  the  Same  Time
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  snb  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
4/4/66
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone...,........State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftiet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
/ F. Stones  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday   except  in  August,  the  last   week   in  December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.   An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.;  $6   in   Canada:   f'O   elsewhere.    Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED