I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966nov14.pdf

============================================================

The  Law  We  Made at Nuremberg Haunts  Us in  Vietnam,  P.  3
A   More   Candid  Progress   Report  Than  McNamara's  on  The  War
"There   doesn't   seem  to  be  any  clear  direction  to  our     keep  coming  down  no  matter  how  many  air  raids.  .  .  .
military  activities; we  don't  seem  to  be  getting  anywhere.     Even  guerrilla  war,  you  would  think,  should  be  achieving
.  .  .  The  Vietcong  keep  going   on  no  matter  how  many      more  visible  results   after  all  this   time  and  with  all   the
search-and-destroy  missions.   The  North  Vietnamese  troops   firepower.   .  .  ."—Wall  Street  Journal editorial, November 4.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  36November  14,  1966
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16   CENTS
The  Billions  Mao's  New  Missile  May  Cost  Us
What,   precisely,   had  Peking   wrought?    Nothing  more
than  Western  intelligence  sources  had  predicted  all  along:
the  Chinese  have  built  a  short-range  nuclear  missile.
—Time  Magazine, November  4.
Those  who  disparage  the  Chinese  nuclear  missile  do  a  dis-
service.    Its  consequences  will  cost  us  billions  of  dollars.    It
may  unleash  a  new  stage  in  the  arms  race,  and  bring  nearer
the  time  when  men  begin  to  go  underground   in  search  of
security   from   their   own   nuclear   weapons.     Let   us   try   to
spell  out  a  few  of  these   consequences:
A  Reckless   Promise  in  Malaysia
1.  In  Malaysia  President  Johnson  promised  a  U.S.  nuclear
umbrella  for  Asian  nations which  feel  threatened  by  Chinese
nuclear  power.    The  Thais  are  getting  ready  to  ask  us  for  a
tactical  missile system.   Japan  may  soon  want  U.S.  missiles  to
protect   it  from  China.    Taiwan  and  the  Philippines,   South
Korea  and  South  Vietnam would  join  the  line-up.    The  Brit-
ish,   expecting  a  more  or  less  formal  guarantee  to  India,  are
offering  Polaris  submarines  for  a  joint  Indian  Ocean  Nuclear
Force   (U.S.   News   &  World   Report, .Nov.   14)   "to   bring
Anglo-American  protection   to  that  part  of  the  world."    As
the  size  of  the  Chinese  force  grows,  the  Cost  of  these  counter-
measures  will  grow  with  it.
2.  Our  major  Asian allies are  no  more  likely  than  were our
major   European  allies   to  rest  content  with  a  U.S.   nuclear
umbrella.    The   same  considerations  which  moved  them   in
Europe  will  move  them  in  Asia.   The  British  built  a  nuclear
force  of  their  own  because they felt  that  without  it  they would
have  no  hope  of  an  effective  voice  in  nuclear  policy.    In  this
sense  it  can  be  said  that  the  British  built  nuclear  forces  as  a
protection  against  us,  i.e.,  against  arbitrary  or  unilateral  de-
cisions  by  the  U.S.       The   French  built  their  own   -force   de
jrappe  to  prevent  the  kind  of  deal  made  over  their  head  by
Washington   and  Moscow  at  the  time  of  Suez.    Asian  powers
like  Japan  and  India  capable  of  achieving  a  nuclear  force  in
the  near  future  may  fear  similar  deals  between  Washington
and  Peking.
3.  We  may  find  ourselves  proposing  in  Asia  the  kind  of
MLF  formula  we  have  suggested  in  Europe.    An  Asian  MLF
might  look  for  a  time  like  a  way  of  staving  off  proliferation.
We  may  also  find  that  this  whets  the  appetite  in  Japan  as  it
has  in  Germany  for  independent  forces,  free  of  the  U.S.  veto.
The  argument  may  be  advanced  in  Japan  that  it  would  be
unsafe  to  depend  on  a  U.S.  which  may  prove  reckless.    As  a
A  Vote  of  No-Confidence  In  LBJ
Two  years  ago  the  country  voted  against  Goldwater.
This  year  it  voted  against  Johnson.   The  Manila  con-
ference  and  the  last   minute  decision  to  forego  cam-
paigning  for  some  minor  surgery  saved  face  for   the
President.    Had  the  vote  come  after  the  kind  of  cross-
country   campaign  Johnson   planned  last   spring,   the
election  returns  would  have  been  crushing.    The  Re-
publican  gain  in  the  House  was  bigger  than  their  own
most  optimistic  forecasts;  overnight,  with  seven  Gov-
ernorships  won,  the  GOP  has  a  whole  new  stable  of
Presidential   hopefuls—Romney,   Reagan,   Rhodes,   two
Rockefellers.    The  racial  backlash  was  not  as  bad  as
feared.    We  regret   the  defeat   of   the   police   review
board  in  New  York  but  welcome  in  Brooke  of  Massa-
chusetts  the  first  Negro  Senator  since  Reconstruction.
"Your  home  is  your  castle"  Mahoney  was  defeated  in
Maryland  and  Maddox  at  press  time  didn't  seem  to  be
the  winner  in  Alabama.  Disquiet over  Vietnam  played
its  part  in  the  Democratic losses.    There  will  be  two
new  Republican  Senators,  Hatfield  of  Oregon and  Percy
of   Illinois  who  defeated  Democratic  hawks,   including
'Douglas  who spoiled a  liberal  record by  being  a  faith-
ful   follower  of  the  China  Lobby.
I 4
small  crowded  island  country, Japan's  national  existence might
be  ended  in  a  m6dern  nuclear  war.    But  an  independent  Jap-
anese  nuclear  force  may  raise  in  us  the  same kind  of  anxieties
as  an  independent  German  nuclear  force.    We  may  begin  to
fear  another  Pearl  Harbor,  this  time  nuclear.    Japan  might
prove  more  of   a  menace  than   China,  as  Germany   proved
more  of  a  menace  than  Russia.    Thus  we  can  see  how   the
emergence  of  China  as  a  nuclear  power  threatens  to  destroy
the  balance  of  power  to  which  we  had  become  accustomed
since  World  War  II.
4.  The  most  unsettling  consequence  of  all  has  to  do  with
the  anti-ballistic  missile.     Secretary  McNamara  has  opposed
the  construction   at  this  time  of  an  anti-missile  against   the
Soviets,  but  he  has  suggested   that  it  might  be  advisable  to
build  a  "little"  anti-missile  system  against  the  relatively  few
missiles  China  may be  able  to  muster  against  us  in  the  next
decade.    But  once  anti-missiles  begin  to  go  up,  a  new  phase
of  the  arms  race  will  begin.    Just  as  we  watch  intently   for
any  sign  of  an  anti-missile  in  the  Soviet  Union,  the  Russians
fear  its  appearance  here.    "One   of  the  gravest  implications
of  the  [Chinese]  test  for  the  Soviet  Union,"  The  Times   of
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  14,1866
What  Do LBJ  and  McNamara  Mean  in  Saying  the  War  Is  "Levelling  Off" —
When Guerrillas Can Shell Saigon and Blow Up Nearby Ammunition Dumps?
The  situation  in  Vietnam  bears  little   resemblance   to  the
optimistic  gloss  put   on  it  by  pre-election   press   conferences
at  LBJ's  ranch:
1.  Even  the  Saigon  area  is  vulnerable.     On  the  night  of
Oct.  28  guerrillas  blew  up  the  Longbinh  arms  depot,  largest
in   South  Vietnam,  only   12  miles  from  Saigon.     "Units   of
the  1st  Infantry,"   the  AP  reported   (Wash.  Star,  Oct.   29),
"had   just   finished  a  week-long   sweep"  of   the   area.     The
depot  is  sealed  off  "with  multiple  rows  of  barbed  wire  fence
and  guarded  by military policemen  and  a  team  of  dogs"   (NY
Times   Oct.   29).     Yet  guerrillas   "with  grenades,   automatic
weapons  and  mortar  fire"  (AP  in  Star  above)   broke  through,
killing  two  U.S.  soldiers  and  wounding  5  to  10  others.    The
huge  munition  explosion  which  followed   shook  Saigon,  send-
ing  an  orange  fireball  over  the  city.    An  artillery  officer  was
quoted   (NY    Times)   as  saying  he  thought  it  was  a  nuclear
blast.
Only  One Mile  From  the  Heart  of  the  City
This  was  followed  four  days  later  by  an  equally  sensational
exploit,   the  shelling   of   Saigon  during  the  National  Day *
celebration  Nov.  1 when  8  persons  including  one  U.S.  Naval
officer   were  killed   and   more  thaa  JO  (including   5  Amer-
icans)  wounded.    The  shelling  was  done  with  75  mm  recoil-
less  rifles  from  a  point  on  the  Saigon  river  only  a  mile  from
the  center  of  the  capital.    Helicopter  crews  failed  to  find  any
trace  of  the   attackers.
2.  Politically:  No   sooner   had   the   Constituent   Assembly
finished  organizing  when   it   rebelled   against   that   provision
of   the  decree  establishing  it  which  gives  the  military  junta
a  veto.    More  than  20  speakers  in  a  stormy  3-hour  session
(UPI  in  Wash.  Daily  News  Nov.  8)  demanded  that  the  mili-
tary  be  stripped  of  this  power.    The  big  landowners  and   old-
line  politicians who  dominate  the  Constituent  Assembly  may
be  far  to  the  right  but  they  differ  from  the  junta  in  three  vital
respects   (1)    they  favor   civilian   rule,   (2)    they  are  mostly
Southerners   and   (3)    many  of   them  want  negotiations   for
* National  Day,  it   should  be  noted,  celebrates  the  over-
throw  of  Diem  in  1963.   The  popularity  of  the  event  among
the   Vietnamese  on  our  side  sheds  a  sardonic  light  on  the
judgment   of   Secretaries   McNamara   and   Rusk   who   were
praising  his  regime  as  an  "economic  miracle" within  a  few
months  of  his  overthrow,  and  on  the  good  sense  of  Johnson
who  in  1951  called Diem  the  Churchill  of  Asia!
Another  Sneaky   Escalation
"On  25  October  at   0800,  five  warships  of   the   U.S.
7th  fleet  intruded  into  the  territorial  waters  in  Quang
Binh  province,  about  8-10   kilometers  from   the   coast,
and  shelled  a  number  of  populated  areas  north of  Dong
Hoi  town.    At  0945  U.S.   warships   again   shelled  this
area.    Then  at   1400  they   bombarded   Sen  Thuy  area
in  Le  Thuy district."
—From  North  Vietnam's  protest  to  the  International
Control  Commission  charging  this  coastal  shelling  was
a  new  escalation  of  the  war   (Hanoi  radio  Oct.  26).
"Saigon,  Nov.  5—The   U.S.  is  using  naval  guns  to
augment  air  strikes  against  enemy coastal  shipping off
North  Vietnam  for  the  first  time, sources  here  acknowl-
edged  tonight.  .  .  .  Destroyers  were  first  deployed on
regular   patrols  off  southern  North   Vietnam   Oct.  25,
but  the  official  announcement of  the  first  naval  gunfire
against  shore  targets  was  delayed.   Officials  here  gave
no  reason  for  the  delay  but  it  was  understood  tonight
the  delay  was  to  avoid  possible  political  repercussions
that    might   affect    the    Manila    conference    then    in
progress."—Ralph  H. Kennan in  Baltimore Sun Nov.  6.
peace,   and  are  uninterested   in   "reconquest"  of   the  North.
The   same   forces   are   reflected   in   the   Cabinet   split   hastily
swept  under  the  rug  before  Manila.    It  did  not  end  with  the
resignation  of  Finance  Minister  Au  Truong  Thanh,  a  civilian,
a  Southerner   and  a  trained  economist  in  a  government   "al-
most  void  in  administrative  and  technical  expertise"  (Ward
Just  in  Wash.  Post  Oct.  28).    Cabinet  opposition  is  still  cen-
tered  on  Ky's  police  chief,  Gen.  Loan,  accused  of  trying  to
set  up  a  police   state.
3.  Pacification:   Of  all  the  fraudulent   terminology  in  this
fraudulent  war,  first  prize  goes  to  this  Madison  Avenue  eu-
phemism.    A  long  AP  survey we  saw only  in  an  early  edition
of  the  Baltimore  Sun  Nov.  6  provided  a  glimpse  of  what  it
means.    "The  only  way to  be  sure  a  peasant  does  not  operate
as  a  secret  Viet  Cong  member,"  the  AP  said,  "is  to  kill  him.
.  .  .  Often  an  area  remains  cleared  only  until  the  Americans
clear  out.  .  .  .  Danang  in  the  north  long  has  been  secured
by  U.S.  Marines  who  landed  18  months  ago"   but  "five  miles
away  the  territory  is  insecure"     One  sentence  in  this  survey
illuminates  the  brutal  realities.    It  said  "One   village  so  per-
sistently   resisted   pacification   that  finally  it  was  destroyed."
Just  like  that,  as  if  we  had  God's  mandate.
A  Few  Stray  Items  on  the  Steps  Taken  To  Insure  LBJ  A  Warm  Welcome
"The  generous  reception  at  the  airport  didn't  just  happen.
Prom   the  'Well  Done,  Mr.  President'  banner,  to  the  150
feet  of  red  carpet,  to  the  free  flags  and  free  transportation,
the  accent  was on orchestration.  . . . Agriculture Dept.   offi-
cers  were  scouring  the  corridors  drumming  up  welcomers
.  .  .  employes  of HEW found  mimeographed  invitations  on
their  desks.  .  .  .  Calls  went  out  from  the  UPO to  its  seven
neighborhood  centers  asking  delegations.  .  .  .  The decision
to  bus  the  school  children  to  the  airport  was  reached  in  a
phone  call  from  Tobriner  ["Mayor"  of  DC]  to  School  Su-
perintendent  Hansen.  .  .  .  Tobriner   issued  a  proclamation
calling  on  all  citizens  to  greet   the   President   in  a  'truly
heartfelt   expression.'  .  .  .  Tobriner   would  not comment
when  asked  whether  the  White  House  had  suggested  the
gesture."
—Washington  Post, Nov.  3, on LBJ's  local  welcome.
"On  the,whole,  the  reception  [in  Asia]   was  overwhelm-
ingly  friendly.   Discounting  the  huge  contrived  demonstra-
tions  such  as  that  in  Seoul  where  a  large  part  of  the  popu-
lation  got  their  orders  to  turn   out."
—Marquis  Childs  back  from  Manila  Wash. Post Nov.  4.
"In   Korea  the   cops  kicked  their  way  into  crowds  and
used   rifle-butts   on  the   skulls  of  dissenters.     In  Thailand
they  stood  with  burp  guns  trained  on  school  children."
—Pete  Hamill  back  from  Manila,  N.Y. Post  Nov.    •'>.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  14, 1966
Only  the  Lawyers'  Guild  Intrepid  Enough  to  Commemorate  the   Anniversary
It's  Become Dangerous to Mention What Happened 20 Yrs. Ago in Nuremberg
The  Nuremberg  trial  20  years  ago  was intended  not  only  to
punish  German  leadership   for  crimes  against  humanity  but
to  establish  precedents  which  might  discourage  their   repeti-
tion.     Here  in  Washington  Nov.   5  the  National   Lawyers'
Guild  held  a  meeting  to  commemorate  the  anniversary.  This
was,  it  is discouraging  to  note,  the  only  conference  of  its kind
in  the  world.    The  meeting  was  held  in  a  board  room  of  the
National   Lawyers  Club.    There  were  no   more  than   50  in
attendance,  mostly  older  lawyers, with  3  reporters  and  a  girl
from  Canadian  Broadcasting  Company  to  cover  the   proceed-
ings.    It  was  clear  that  this  was  an  anniversary  about  which
the  country  could  not  care  less.
The  Year  the  Cold  War  Began
The  United  Nations  staff  seems  to  be  so  unaware  that  ori-
ginally   its   legal   counsel,   and   Under   Secretary,  Constantin
Stavropoulos,  was  to  address  the  luncheon.    At  the  last  min-
ute  the  UN  instead  sent  a  young  man,  Maxim  Tardu,  from
the  Human  Rights  Commission,  who  delivered  a  lecture  on
international  law  which  was  as  discreet  as  an  encyclopaedia
article.    It  was  noteworthy  chiefly  for  its  account  of  the  maze
of   subcommissions,   drafts,    revisions   and   amendments,   in
which  the  UN's   International  Law  Commission  has   become
hopelessly  lost  since  it  was  instructed  by  the  General   Assem-
bly  in   1947  to  prepare  a  draft  code  of  offenses   against   the
peace   and   security  of   mankind   based   on   the    Nuremberg
Judgment  and  the  UN  Charter.    That  was  the  year  the  cold
war  began,  and  made  both  sides  nervous  at  any  mention  of
Nuremberg.
Three  veterans  of  Nuremberg  were  speakers  at  the  confer-
ence.    Mary  Kaufman,  the  chairman,  was  on  the  U.S.  prose-
cution  team.    Prof.  John  Fried,  of  New  York's  City  Univer-
sity,  was a  U.S.  legal  consultant.   The  venerable  but  vigorous
Prof.  Quincy  Wright  was  legal   adviser  to  former  Attorney
General  Frances  Biddle,  one  of  the  U.S.  judges.
Prof.  Fried  spoke  with  a  scholar's  love  of  the  long  evolu-
tion  which  lay  behind  the  principles  applied   at   Nuremberg,
including  the  work   of  "that  immortal  Jesuit,   Suarez"  who
first  held   that   heathens   and   heretics  were   not   outside   the
law,  a  principle .both  sides  in  the  cold  war  are  still  reluctant
to  recognize.    Prof.  Wright's  topic  was  "the   crime  against
The  Nuremberg   Pledge   and  The  Law
"It  may  seem   ironic  that   the  first  serious  effort   to
revitalize   Nuremberg   into  a  binding  legal  and  moral
precedent  has  been  undertaken  by  citizens  of  this  coun-
try  who assert  that  their  own  government  has  engaged
in  an  illegal   war  in  Vietnam  in  violation  of  interna-
tional  law  and  morality.    Yet  there  is  logic  to  this  de-
velopment.    Justice   Jackson,   our  chief    representative
and  principal  architect   of   the   Nuremberg   trials,   re-
peatedly—almost   passionately—asserted:  'And  let   me
make  clear  that  while  this  law  is  first  applied  against
the   German  aggressors—it   must   condemn  aggression
by  any  other  nations,  including  those  which  sit  here  in
judgment'."
—Ernest  Goodman, president  Nat'1 Lawyers  Guild.
'  Initiation  of  invasions  of  other  countries.  . . .  Atroc-
ities  or  offenses  against  persons  or  property ...  in-
cluding   but   not  limited   to   murder,  ill   treatment   or
deportation ...  of  civilian  population   from   occupied
territory  .  .  .  ill-treatment  of  prisoners  of  war .  .  .
wanton  destruction   of  cities,   towns  or  villages.  .  .  ."
—Allied  Control  Law   No.  10  promulgated   in   I9lt5
for   the  trial  of  war  criminals.
peace,"  and  he  touched  in  passing   (see  box  below)   on  the
war   in  Vietnam,  a  topic  which  hung   like  a  menacing  but
rarely  mentioned   cloud  over  the   proceedings.                                                                         >
The  final  speaker   was  Leonard   Boudin,  who  has  made  a
shining  record   as  defender  of   civil  liberties.    He  now  rep-
resents  a  number  of  clients  resisting  the  draft  on  the  ground
that   the  Vietnamese  war   offends   their  consciences  and   the
principles   established   in   the  postwar  Nazi   trials.     One  of
these  principles  was  that  those  guilty  of  war  crimes  were  not
allowed  to  escape  judgment  by  pleading  that  they  were  only
carrying  out  "superior  orders."   This  precedent  is  being  cited
in  the  draft  cases.    Boudin  said  the  government  argues  that
the  individual  may  never  be  sent  to  Vietnam,  or  if  sent, may
do  nothing  more  unlawful  than  to  cook  for  his  army  mates.
The   plea,   one   Circut   Court  has  already  held,   is  therefore
premature.    "The   difficulty  with  holding  that  the  defense  is
premature,"  Mr.  Boudin  said,  "is  that  if  carried  to  a  logical
extreme  it  may  also  be  posthumous."     This  was  the  lightest
moment  in  a  sad  day.
Prof.  Quincy  Wright  Says  Most  of  Us  Are  Either  Isolationists   or  Imperialists
'The  assumption  by  the  'great  powers'  that  they  have  a
responsibility  to  intervene  with  military  force   unilaterally
to  maintain  order,  especially  in  neighboring   zones  (as  the
U.S.  in  the  Caribbean  and  the  Soviet  Union  in  Eastern  Eu-
rope)  or  to  maintain  ideological  principles  such  as  to   con-
tain  communism'  or  'to  liberate  oppressed   people*  has   in-
duced  aggressions.     The  initiation  of   such  aggressions  as
the  Anglo-French  intervention  in  Suez   (1956),   the   Soviet
intervention   in   Hungary   (1956),   the   Chinese  invasion  of
India   (1962),  the  U.S.   toleration  of  a  military  expedition
to  Cuba  (1961)  and  the  U.S.  intervention  in  Vietnam  (1964)
and  Santo  Domingo  (1965)  would  seem  to  be  crimes  against
peace   under  the   Nuremberg  principles.    Consequently   the
great  powers  seek  to  forget  these  principles.
"The  failure  of  world  opinion  to  understand  and  accept
the  image  of  the  world  order  assumed   by  the  Nuremberg
Charter  and  the  United  Nations  Charter  has  obstructed  the
effectiveness  of  these  instruments.    They  assume   that  the
only  feasible  and  reasonably  satisfactory   world order  under
present   conditions  is   an  international   order  of   peacefully
coexisting   states  each  free  to  develop  its  own  culture  in
its  own  way  without  encroachment  on  the  others.  .  .  .
"Such  a  world order  is  different  from  an  order  of  isolated
nationalism  resting  only  on  a  balance  of  military  power or
an   order   of   imperialism   dominated   from   a   single   center
with   superior   power.    But   most   people,  especially   in   the
United  States,  are  either  isolationists  or  imperialists.   They
want   either  to  keep  out  of  the  world  or  to  remake  it   in
their  own  image."
—Prof.   Quincy  Wright,   dean  of  American   international
law  scholars, speaking  on "The  Supreme  Crime—The  Crime
Against  Peace"  at  the  National  Lawyers'   Guild    conference.
1-0  *
1
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November U, 1966
How  A  Poor  Country  Could  "Detour"  Around  Our   Anti-Missiles
(Continued  from   Page One)
London   reported   from   Moscow  Oct.  29,   "is  that   it  might
ultimately  involve it  in  an  anti-ballistic  missile  race  with  the
United   States.    This  is  because  China's  eventual  capacity  to
deliver  a  nuclear-tipped  missile on  the North  American main-
land  might  force  the  United  States  into  developing  an  exten-
sive  anti-missile  system."    This  would  force  both  big  powers
to  embark  on  an  expensive,  dangerous  and  unknown  course.
The  Secret  Debate   Already  On
Within  the  military  bureaucracy  and  the military-industrial
complex,  this  is  the  $64  billion  dollar  question  in  the  secret
debates  which  have  already  begun  on  the  fiscal  '68  budget.
The  public  is  all  but  unaware,  though  the  issues  are  momen-
tous.    The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  and  their  allies  in   Congress
have  been  pressing  hard  for  the  construction  of  an anti-missile
system.    McNamara  has  vetoed  this  on  the  ground  that  there
is  no  anti-missile system in  sight  which  could  keep  U.S. fatal-
ities  below   "some  tens  of  millions"  in  any  Soviet  attack.*
This  spells   co-existence  or  co-destruction.    But  the   appear-
ance  of  anti-missiles would  upset  this  equation  and  force  each
side  into  counter   measures:   more  missiles,  deeper   shelters,
<*«//-anti-missiles.    Fallout  shelters  would  be  needed  on  both
sides  to  protect  one's  own  people  from  the  fallout  of   one's
own  anti-missiles, «and  the  cost  of  the  first  "primitive"   Nike
X  system  is estimated at  a $8  to  $30  billions  "down-payment"
and  $1  to  $5  billion  annually  after  that.
But  one  of  the  many  ways  to  "detour"  around  an  anti-mis-
sile  system  was  indicated  by  Dr.  Jerome  Wiesner,  Kennedy's
science  adviser,  when  he  estimated  that  a  blast  shelter pro-
gram  would  be  necessary, at  a  cost  of  40  to  $50  billions,  be-
cause  "both  sides  still  have  the  option  of  high-altitude  major
blasts  that  could  ignite  cities  and  create  lots  of   fires."   We
Out  of  Both  Sides  of  Their  Mouths
Q.  Mr.  Secretary  .  .  .  you  gave  no  estimate  of  the
level  of  bombing activity  in  1967.   Could you  do  so?
A.  I  mentioned  that  we  have  been  flying  somewhat
more  than  25,000  attack  sorties  a  month  and  I  didn't
anticipate  any  significant  increase.
—McNamara  at LBJ's  ranch Nov.  5.
Tokyo—Wm.  P.  Bundy,  U.S. Assistant   Secretary  of
State  for  Far  Eastern  Affairs   was  reported  today  to
have  told  Japanese  government  officials  that  the U.S.
might  intensify  its  bombing  of  North  Vietnam.
—Associated  Press  ticker  same  day.
We  suspect  the  volume  of  truth  increases   with  the
distance   from   American   ballot   boxes.     McNamara's
forecast  was  part  of  a  press  conference  designed   to
create  the   impression  the  war  was  going  so  well  in
Vietnam  we  could  slow  down  our  military   effort   next
year.
* I  am  indebted  to  a  first-rate  8-part  series  on  the  anti-
missile  in  the   Bedford,   Mass.,   Standard-Times   by  Everett
S.  Allen which  was  later  sent  out  in  abbreviated  form  by  the
Associated  Press  (see Washington  Star,  Oct.  30).
would'  soon  be  building  our  cities  underground.
The  antr-missile  is  not  a  magic  gadget   guaranteed  to  flip
off   enemy  missiles  as  a  remote  control  switch  flips  off   TV
programs.    It  can  be  countered  by  more  and  bigger  missiles,
by  more,  and  more  ingenious,  "decoy"  warheads,  and  perhaps
by  entirely  new  and  more  devilish  methods  for  killing  human
beings.    All  this  in  reply  to  a  system which  can  never  really
be  tested,  except  in  nuclear  war, when  it  will  be  too  late  to
know.    As  Dr.  Jeremy  J.  Stone  points  out  in  his  book, "Con-
taining  the  Arms  Race"  the  whole  issue  of  the  anti-missile
"is beyond  computation  and untestable.  . . . Who  really  knows
whether  it  will  work  at  all?"    While  our  scientists   go  on
devising  these  fantastically intricate  and  costly  drawing  board
nightmares,  a  poor   country  like  China  can  get   around   an
anti-missile  system  by  putting  H-bombs  on  a  few  submarines
or  even merchant ships  and  threatening  if  attacked  to  set them
off   in  the  harbors  of  New  York  and  San  Francisco.
(This  was  the  second  of  three  pieces  on  the
China missile.   Next Week: The One Way Out.)
We'll  Be Glad  to Send A  Sample Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
Also  PLEASE Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers   Urgent
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the  enclosed   $5:
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Name
11/14/66
Street   ......................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State..
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................   State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if   announcement  wished  D
I. R Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week   in   December  and   U>«
Ant   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.. Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the  U.S.:   $6  in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:  920  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED