I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966feb14.pdf

============================================================

The  Only  Sure  Way  to End  Poverty,  P.  2
Why  Expecting  Social  Reform  From  Saigon  Is  Like  Trying  to  Square  The  Circle
"The  Administration  is  placing  renewed  hope  on  the  pos-
sibility   of   a   strengthened   village  pacification  program  in
South  Vietnam,  tied  in  with  Premier  Ky's  recent  pledge  to
institute  new,  far-reaching  domestic   social  reforms."
—New  York  Herald-Tribune  Feb.    !>  on  the  Hawaii  parley.
"The  Saigon  government ...  is  faced  with  an  extremely
difficult   task,  since  the  people  most  likely  to  be  hurt  by  radi-
cal   social   reform  are  in  charge   of   carrying  it   out.     The
U.S.  is  really  asking  nothing  less  than  for  the  minority of
Vietnamese  who  have  run  the  country  for  centuries  to  share
their  wealth  and  political  power  with  a  peasantry  they  have
always  ignored  or  exploited."
—Richard   Critchfield    from   Saigon  in   Washington   Star
Feb.  5  "U.S.   Aid  Keeps   Making   Vietnamese  Rich  Richer".
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  6
FEBRUARY  14,  1966
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Resort  to  Hula-Hula
The   Honolulu   meeting  was  a  last-minute  razzle-dazzle  to
distract  attention  from  the  rising  opposition  in  the  Senate  to
the   war.    Even   so   sedate   a   State   Department   reporter   as
Scripps-Howard's    R.   H.    Shackford    reported    wryly    from
Hawaii,   Feb.   8,   "Many    American   participants   have   only
vague  ideas  why  they  are  here  and  what  they  are   supposed
to   do."     The   most   important   news-  was   underplayed—the
warning  by  "a  high  U.S.  official"  that  even  if  bombing  raids
on  North  Vietnam  were  increased  to  four  times  their  present
level,  it  would  have  "no  major  effect"   on  the  military  situa-
tion  in  the  South  (New   York   Herald-Tribune,   Feb.  8).   The
high   official,  from  all  I  can  learn,  was  Secretary  of   Defense
McNamara.   The   briefing  was  intended  to  counter   demands
for  stepped-up   bombing  from  that  playboy  Air  Marshal  and
admirer  of  Adolf  Hitler,  Premier  Nguyen  Cao  Ky,  on  whom
we  are  about  to  center   our  new  propaganda   campaign—the
"second   front"   we  are  opening   up   for   a  "new   society"   in
Vietnam.   This  is  the  Great   Society  ploy  extended   to   South-
east  Asia.
Ky  Hesitates  on  Land  Reform
Just  how  seriously  this  can  be  taken   is  evident  from  the
treatment  of  land  reform,  the  central,  urgent,  inescapable  and
long  postponed  problem  in  winning  the  peasant.   On  this,  as
on  other  matters,  the  U.S.  and  its  puppets   could  not   agree.
There  had  to  be  separate  statements  of  purpose  instead  of  a
single   joint   communique.    The   separate   statement   by   the
U.S.    pledges    support    "to    measures   of    social   revolution,
including   land    reform."     The    separate    South    Vietnamese
statement   makes  no  mention  of  land  reform.   This  is natural
since  its  base  lies  in  the  landed  gentry  of  the  provinces  and
the   absentee   landlords   in   Saigon.    The   most  we  could   get
from  the  Saigon  crowd  was  the  inclusion  in  the  joint  com-
munique  of  a  cautious  sentence,   "Steps  for  more  rapid  land
reform  were  carefully  reviewed."    Perhaps  Ky  and  his  asso-
ciates  take  words   too  seriously.   Our  own  highly   advertised
devotion   to  land  reform  in  Latin  America  did  not  keep  us
from   reversing   it   in   Guatemala,   fighting   it   in   Cuba   and
applauding   the  overthrow  of  Goulart   after  he  took  the  first
timid   steps   toward   it  in  Brazil.   We   can  hardly  expect   the
landlords  of  Saigon  to  be  more  ready  to  sacrifice  their  hold-
ings  than  we  have  been  to  give  up  United  Fruit's.   Any day
So  We  Who  Believed  LBJ  Are  The  Blind—
Goldwater  and  Nixon  The  Men  of  Vision?
"There   are  special   pleaders   who  counsel   retreat   in
Vietnam.   They  belong  to  a  group  that  has  always  been
blind  to  experience   and  deaf  to  hope."
—Johnson  arriving  in  Honolulu,  Feb.  6.
"Do  you  mean  Pope   Paul?    Do  you  mean  Senators
who  believe   Communism  in   Asia   will  not   fall   before
weapons?    Do   you   mean   the   millions  of   Americans
who  voted  for   you  in  1964  when  you  counseled   them
against  expanding  and  escalating  the  war  into   North
Vietnam?"
—Senator  Morse  replying  next   day.
"I   have  had  advice  to   load  our   planes   with  bombs
and  to  drop  them  on  certain  areas  that  I  think   would
escalate  the  war,  and  result  in  our  committing  a   good
many   American   boys   to   fighting   a  war   that   I  think
ought  to  be  fought  by  the  boys  of  Asia  to  help  protect
their  own  land."
—LBJ   campaigning  in  Texas,  Aug.  29,  1964,  quoted
by  Morse,  Feb.  7,  1966.
we  side with  the  landless  against  the  landed  in  South  Vietnam
the  rebellion  will  collapse.   But  we  don't  think  Ho  Chi  Minh
need    take    too    many    sleeping    pills    worrying   about    its
imminence.
There  is  as  wide  a  gap  on  the  peace  offensive.    The   U.S.
statement—but   not   Saigon's—says   "no   path   to   peace  shall
be  unexplored."    The  joint  statement  says  both  governments
"note  with  regret   the  total  absence  of  a  present  interest  in
peace  on  the  part  of  the  Government  of  North  Vietnam."
There   is  even  less  interest  in  Saigon.   Ky  won't  even  agree
with  Hanoi  and  Washington   on  a  return  to  the  1954  Geneva
agreement.   He  dismissed  it  in  a  Honolulu   press  conference
as  "just  a  cease-fire  agreement"  that  the  South,  in  any  case,
had  never  signed.   (Wash.  Post,  Feb.  9).   He  also  said flatly
that  he  would  "never"  sit  down  at  the  conference  table  with
the  National  Liberation Front.   But  just as  the  conference was
getting  underway, W.   Averill  Harriman  was  "signalling"   to
the  other  side  a  softening  of  our  bargaining  position.   In  an
interview  with  UPI's  audio  network  for  release  Feb.  7, Harri-
man  said  that  the  NLF   could  be  represented  at  Geneva   "As
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  H, 1966
This  Fiscal  Year  It's   Costing   $400,000  Each  to  Kill  A  Viet  Cong
(Continued  from   Page   One)
part  of  the  North  Vietnamese  delegation  or as an  independent
group  who  have  an  interest  in  the  discussion"   (our   italics)
though  not  "as  a government."   This  is  the  first  time  the  U.S.
has  ever   agreed   to   talk   with   the  NLF   as  "an   independent
group".   This  concession  may  possibly  explain  why  24  hours
later  the  North   Vietnamese  Consul   General   in  New   Delhi
called  attention  to  a  postcript  on  Ho's  Jan.  24  letter  to  India
suggesting  that  as chairman of  the  3-nation  International  Con-
trol  Commission,  India  had  a  special  responsibility  for  restor-
ing  peace.   This  possible  hint  of  a  readiness for  Indian  media-
tion  is made  the  more  interesting because  of  China's  animosity
to  India.   Ho  risked  Peking's  anger.
What  Hanoi  Meant  By  "Sole"
There  was  another  noteworthy  point  in  that  same  interview
—Harriman's  interpretation  of   Ho's   demand   in  the  Jan.  24
letter  that  the  NLF  be  recognized  as  "the   sole   representative"
of   the  South  Vietnamese  people.    The   reporters   questioning
Harriman  interpreted  this  as  a  "hardening"  of  Hanoi's  posi-
tion.   Harriman  saw  it  differently.   "When  I  was  in   Moscow
last   July,"   he   said,   "the   suggestions   were   we  get  hold  of
Hanoi;  in  the  various talks  that  we  had  with  different  people,
with  Kosygin  and  others,  get  hold  (sic)—talk  to  Hanoi.   The
finger  of  the  world  was  pointed  at  Hanoi,  and  I  think   they
suddenly  realized  that they were  on  the  spot  and  they  attempted
to  get  away  from  the  most  embarrassing  position,  from  their
standpoint,   by  this   letter  of   Ho   Chi   Minh,  by  which   they
point  to  the  Viet  Cong   as  the   one  with  whom   we   should
negotiate.   /  think  it  uas  a  device  to  get  off   the  hot  spot  on
which   they   found   themselves."     (Our   italics.)    This   inter-
prets  the  reference  to  mean  that  the  NLF   is  "sole"   repre-
sentative   in  the   sense  that  Hanoi,   like  Peking   or   Moscow,
cannot  talk  for  it.   This  may  be  read  with  the  Hanoi   Foreign
Ministry  memorandum  broadcast  Feb.   3.   In  discussing  U.S.
objection   to  the  third  of   the   four  points,  this  memorandum
interprets  it  to  mean  not  "handing  over"   South  Vietnam  to
the  NLF   (as  the  U.S.  says)  but  building  "a  broad  national
democratic  coalition  government  composed  of  representatives
of  all  social  strata,  nationalities,  parties, religious communities
and   patriotic  personalities."  This  statement  and  Harriman's
RFK's  Initiative  on  Nuclear   Weapons
We  applaud  Senator   Robert   F.  Kennedy   for  an  act
of   moral   leadership    in   a   speech   to   the   New   York
Society   of   Newspaper   Editors   Feb.   1.   He   urged   the
U.S.    to   accept    Premier    Kosy gin's   proposal    to   the
Geneva  disarmament  conference  Feb.  3.   This  calls  for
a  joint  pledge  by  the  nuclear  powers  not  to  use  nuclear
weapons    against    non-nuclear   states   which   have   no
nuclear  weapons  on  their  territory.   The  official   Wash-
ington  reaction  to  this  Soviet  suggestion  was  cold.  The
U.S.   has   steadfastly   refused    to   promise   not   to   use
nuclear   weapons,   or  not  to  use  them   first.   The  State
Dept.  still  regards  the  Bomb  as  a  terroristic  ace-in-the-
hole  with  which  to   cow   any   adversary.    This   proved
ineffective  in  practice  even  before  our  monopoly  of  the
Bomb  was   broken,   but   the   idea   hangs   on,   fossilized,
among   the   cliches   of   the   Department.    "We   cannot
expect  other  nations,"  Senator  Kennedy  said,  "to  forego
the  same  club  which  we  ourselves  are  unwilling to  lay
down."    Indeed   in   the   long   run  proliferation   can   be
stopped   only    if   the   nuclear    powers   give    up   these
weapons.    The  threat  is  too  terrible  for  any  nation   to
trust   another's    pledge.
seem  to  offer  hope  for   negotiation.
The   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   hearings,   from
which  Johnson  grabbed  the  spotlight,  show  how  little  support
he  has  for  stepping  up  American  involvement.    Hickenlooper,
Lausche  and  Symington  seem  to  be  the  only  Administration
supporters  not  only  on  Vietnam  but  (as  the  Lincoln  Gordon
hearings  showed)   on  Latin  American  policy.   The   hearings
also  demonstrated  how  ill  informed  most  of  the  Senate  For-
eign   Relations  Committee  members   are  even   in  this  special
field  of  their  expertise.   Two  important   statistics  have  so  far
come  out  of  the  hearings.  Fulbright  showed  that  at  the  current
rate  of   expenditure   it  was  costing   us   about   5400,000   each
for  every Viet  Cong  we  claimed  to  have killed.   Gore  observed
that   a   Senate   Public  Works   Committee  report   Dec.    1963
showed  a  $37   billion   backlog   of  essential  community  needs
in   matters  as   vital   as  water   supply   and   sewage.    We    are
spending  almost  half  that  much,  he  pointed  out,  on  the  Viet-
namese  war  in  this  fiscal  year  alone.   Whether  Great  Society
here  or  New  Society  there,  it  won't  be  built  by  war.
The  Biggest  and  Most Hopeful News  of  The  Week  Overshadowed By  The  War  Madness
The  most  important  news  of  the  past  week  was  not  the
first  soft   landing   on  the   moon   (another  triumph  of   mere
technology,  with   disturbing   military   implications)   nor  the
press  relations  circus  in  Honolulu but  the  acceptance  for  the
first  time  by  a  Presidential commission  of  the  idea  of   gov-
ernment-guaranteed  minimum  subsistence   for  the  poor.  The
idea  of  a  "negative  income  tax"  to  provide  a  minimum in-
come  allowance  has  been  kicking  around  for  a   generation.
I  remember  my  old  editor,  J.  David  Stern,  advocating   it  30
years   ap;o   in   the   Philadelphia  Record  and   the   New   York
Post  as  the  one  certain  way  to  put  a  floor  under  poverty.
Robert  Theobold  in  recent   years  has  been   this  idea's   most
eloquent  and  tireless  advocate;  see  his  Free  Men  and  Free
Markets  (1963).   To  have  it  accepted  by  the  National Com-
mission  on  Technology,  Automation  and  Economic  Progress
set   up  by  the  White  House  a  year  ago   is  an  historic  step
forward.    The  income  tax  would  be  used  as  a  direct  equal-
izer,  with   the  government  collecting   as   it   does   now  from
the   wealthy  but  paying  out   enough   to   the   poor   to  raise
their  income  to  a  guaranteed minimum.
If   our  minds,  our  news  space,  and  our  attention   weren't
so  absorbed  by  fighting  the  insanity  of  the  Vietnamese  war,
this  report  would  be  the   No.  1  topic  of  discussion   every-
where.    A  guarantee   of  minimum  subsistence,   swiftly  im-
plemented  and  set  at  an  adequate  level,  would  at  one  swoop
eliminate   a  whole  series   of   problems,   or   reduce   them   to
minor  proportions.   Without  such  action,  neither  the  Negro
poor   nor   the   disadvantaged   youth   can   end   their   misery.
The  report  warns  that  their  high  jobless  rate  will  continue
or  even  rise  in  the  absence  of  drastic   action.    The   tragic
scenes  of   the   past   week   in   Mississippi,   where   "tractored
out"   Negro   sharecroppers    were   denied   temporary    refuge
even  in  idle  military  barracks  could  be  made  things  of   the
past  overnight.    We  hope  the  report,  as  soon  as  available
in  printed  form,  will  be  the   subject   of   widespread   debate
and  agitation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February14,196S
Revelations  in  Ramparts  Magazine  Show  How  We  Turn  The  People  Against  Us
A  Special  Forces  Veteran  Lifts  the  Curtain  on  Its  Repulsive  Practices
The  idea  behind the  Green  Berets,  the  Army  Special  Forces,
originated   among   the   professional  French   soldiers  captured
in   the  earlier  Indochina  War.    They   came  home   impressed
with  what  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  General  Giap  had  done  against
superior  firepower.  They  studied  Mao  Tse-tung  and  returned
with  the  notion  of  applying  Communist  doctrine  in  reverse,
to maintain  the  French  colonial  empire  in North  Africa.   They
trained  themselves  in  conspiracy,  "civic  action",  terrorism  and
psychological  warfare;  this  was  what   they  called   la  guerre
revolutionnaire.   Though  there  were  idealists  among  them,  as
there  are  among  our  American  practitioners  of  this  doctrine,
their   tactics  soon   degenerated   into   Fascist-style  torture  and
counter-terror.  They  failed  to  win  the  Algerians, and  when  de
Gaulle  decided  to  end  the  war  and  free  Algeria,  they  turned
their   activities   against   the   French   Republic   and   tried   to
assassinate   de  Gaulle.    Some   of   the   most   famous  of   these
warriors  are  now  fugitives  from  French  justice,  but  their  ideas
are  still  regarded  as  gospel  at  Ft.  Bragg,  where  Special  Forces
are trained.
Now  Fugitives  From  Justice
This   is  the  background  against  which  to  read   the  sensa-
tional  memoirs  of  a  Special  Forces  veteran  in  Ramparts  Maga-
zine  for  February  (Menlo  Park,  Cal.,  75<).   M.  Sgt.   Donald
Duncan,  who  turned  down  a  commission  and  a  captaincy  and
left  the  army  after  10  years  of  service,  calls  his  article   "The
Whole  Thing  Was  A  Lie!"    He  describes  his  evolution   from
"militant   anti-Communist"   to   the   discovery   that   "it's   not
democracy   we  brought   to   Vietnam—it's   anti-Communism."
And  "anti-Communism,"   he  concludes,  "is  a  lousy  substitute
for   democracy."    Finally,  he  wonders  "whether   Communism
is  spreading  in  spite  of  our  involvement  or  because  of   it."
Duncan  writes  that  he  volunteered   for   Special   Forces   in
1959  out  of  militant  anti-Communism,  while  serving  with  the
Army   in  Germany.   At   Ft.   Bragg,   where  he   was  sent   for
training,   he   found   "a   good   percentage"    of   Special   Forces
were  refugees  from  Communist  countries  whose  "anti-Com-
munism  bordered  on  fanaticism."
Like   their   French   counterparts,   they   studied  Communist
rather  than  democratic models.   They  learned NKVD  methods
of   torture  to   extract  information.    "When   teaching  Special
Forces  how  to  set  up  guerrilla warfare  in  an  enemy country,"
Duncan  writes,  "killing  unpopular   officials   is  pointed  out  as
one  method   of  gaining  friends   among   the   populace.   It   is
recommended   that  special  assassination  teams  be  set  up   for
this  purpose."    This  is  also  Viet  Cong  tactics.
In  Vietnam  itself  he  came  to  see,  "We  weren't preserving
Castro   and  China
The  relations  between   big  states  and  small  are  not
changed  by  ideology.   There  is  not  a  single  East  Euro-
pean  Communist  state  which  has  not  learned  this  bitter
lesson  from  experience.  The  Tito  revolt,  Nagy's  execu-
tion,   the   Polish   October   and   the   liquidation   of   the
Bulgarian    Communist    hero,   Dimitrov,   for   daring   to
suggest   a   Balkan    federation    despite   Russian   disap-
proval    are   only   the    more   obvious   example    of   this
axiom.   Moscow  has  its  own  "Monroe  Doctrine"  in  East
Europe.   Imperialism  does  not  end  with  the  abolition  of
capitalism.    So  it  is  not  surprising   to  see   conflict   be-
tween   Peking   and   Havana.    Castro's   complaint    that
China   tried   to   "subvert"  his   military   and   officialdom
recalls  Tito's  similar   complaint  against   Stalin.   Those
who  read  into  this  dispute  only  an  effort  by  Castro  to
please the  Russians  are,  in  my opinion,  mistaken.  Cuba's
dignity  and independence  mean  a  great  deal  to  Fidel,  as
he  demonstrated  in  the  missile  crisis  when   he  refused
to  allow  the  inspection  on  which  Khrushchev  had  agreed
with  Kennedy,   and  got  away  with  it.   The  full  story  of
this  quarrel   with   China   is  yet   to  be  told.   But  if   we
were  wise  we  would   see   the  break   as  another  oppor-
tunity   to  negotiate  a  settlement  with   Cuba   and  make
it  a  friendly   neighbor  again  instead  of  a  hostile  base
on  our  doorstep.
freedom.   There was no  freedom  to  preserve.   To  voice opposi-
tion  to  the  government  meant  jail  or  death.   Neutralism   was
forbidden  or  punished  .  .  .  We  aren't  the  freedom fighters.
We   are  the   Russian  tanks  blasting   the   hopes   of   an   Asian
Hungary."
The  choice  we  offer  is  not  between  communism  and  democ-
racy  but  between  communism  and  anti-communism.  "This  is
why  most  of  them,"  Duncan  says,  "have  embraced  the  Viet
Cong.   The   people   remember  that  when  they  were   fighting
the  French  for  their  national  independence  it  was  the  Ameri-
cans  who   helped   the   French.    It's  the   American  anti-Com-
munist   bombs  that   kill   their  children.   It's  American  anti-
Communism  that  has  supported  one  dictator  after  another  in
Saigon.   When   anti-Communist napalm  burns  their  children
it  matters little  that  an  anti-Communist  Special  Forces  medic
comes  later  to  apply  bandages.
We   recommend  this  article  highly,  not   just   for   what   it
reveals  from  the  inside  about  our  operations  in  Vietnam  but
for  the  light  it  sheds  on  a  cancerous growth  inside our  society.
To  train  men  in  crime,  to  teach  them  cynically  that  the  end
justifies  the  means,  to  make  professional conspirators  of  them
is  to   breed   at  home   the   same  anti-democratic  menace  that
faced  France in  the  wake of  the  Algerian settlement.
The  House  Un-American   Activities   Committee  and  the  Ku  Klux  Klan
"Mr.  Speaker,  this  year  the  Un-American  Activities   Com-
mittee  altered  its  role  somewhat   by  attacking  the  far  right
instead  of  the  far  left.    Admittedly  the  investigation  of  the
Ku  Klux  JKlan  makes  for  a  cloudier  case  against  the   com-
mittee,  since  there  is  a  clear  need  for  effective  Federal   leg-
islation  to deal  with  violence.
"But  the  proper  forum  in  which  to  consider   such  legisla-
tion  is   the   Judiciary   Committee.     The   political   beliefs   of
the  Ku  Klux  Klan  should  not  be  the  subject  of  a   legislative
investigation.  . . .
"The  goal  of  any  investigation  of  the  Klan  should  have
been   indelibly   clear.    It   should   be  to  come  to  grips   with
brutality  and  murder  and  to  protect  American   citizens  from
acts  of  violence  not   from   speech  and  propganda.    The   in-
vestigation  by  the   Un-American    Activities   Committee   has
blurred  this  goal.    After  years  of  ignoring   the  Klan,  that
it  is  now,   in  the   view  of  the  committee,  'un-American'  is
irrelevant.    The  charge  against  the  Klansmen  is  that  they
are  murderers."
—Rep  Wm.  F.  Ryun  (D.  N.Y.)   in  flic  House  Jan.   27.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  14, 1966
The  Revocation  of   Lynd's  Passport—Moscow   Lets  A  Critical  Writer  Out
4-Year  Terms  for  Congress?   The  President  Is  Already  Too   Powerful
We  disagree  with  most  of  the  political  scientists  and   agree
with  Chairman Celler  of  House  Rules Committee  in  opposing
the  Johnson  proposal  for  4-year  terms  in  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives,   to   run   concurrently   with   the   President's.     The
power   of   the   Presidency   has  grown   so  great,   especially   in
making  war,  as  to  emphasize  the   danger   of   a  rubber-stamp
Congress   swept   into  office   on   his  coat-tails.   If   4-year  terms
are  to  be  adopted,   the  election  should   take  place  in  the  off-
years   between   Presidential  elections.    The   off-year    elections
give  the  country  a  chance  to  register  disapproval  if  a  President
fails  to  keep   his  promises,  as  Johnson   did   in  running   as  a
peace  candidate  and  then  adopting  much  of  Goldwater's   poli-
cies   in  Vietnam.   The   only   leverage   the   electorate   now  has
against  the  war  is  Johnson's   fear  that  it  will  cost  him  control
of  Congress  in November ...
The  Eloquence  of  Empty  Chairs
We   are  glad  to  hear  that   Prof.   Staughton   Lynd  has  beeri
invited  to  a  "teach-in"  on  Vietnam  in  Norway  April  16  and
another  in  England at  Eastertime.  We  hope  there  will  be  more
such  invitations  from  abroad  to  dramatize,  by  an  empty  chair,
the   Iron   Curtain  the  U.S.—alone  of   all  the   free  nations—
imposes  on  the  travel  of  its  citizens.   Empty  chairs  around   the
world   would   effectively   protest   the  withdrawal  of    passports
from   Lynd   and  his  companions  to  Hanoi,   and   from   Chris-
topher    Koch    and   his   on   an   earlier   trip   last    Fall.    All
through    the   years   from    1917   to    1933   when   we   had   no
diplomatic  relations  with  Russia,  Americans  travelled   freely
there.    These   new   restrictions  on   North   Vietnam,   China,
North  Korea,  Albania  and  Cuba  are  a  post  World  War   II
development,   in  which  our   bureaucracy  has   taken   over   the
bad   habits  of   the   Soviet   Union's,   in   restricting   travel   for
political   reasons.   The   Supreme  Court   has  struck  down   per-
sonal  restrictions  but  not  restrictions  by  country  or  area.    The
Lynd  case  may provide a  new  test  with  more  success ...
While  we're  on  the  subject,  we're  also  glad  to  see  that  the
LI.S.S.R.   has   given   Valery   Tarsis   permission   to   deliver   a
series  of  lectures  in  Britain  but  find  it  offensive  that  the  price
he  had  to  pay  was  to  denounce  two  other  writers  facing  trial
for   doing   what   he   himself   did—find   creative   freedom   by
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name   ...................................................................—.....•..—.—•—•
Street     ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
2/14/66
Fpr  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if  announcement  wished   D
The  Price  of  Keeping  The  Negro  Down
"The    economic  cost   of   discrimination becomes   most
evident  when  there  is  near   full   employment  of  white
labor.    If  economic  and'  social   policies  could  be  speci-
fically   designed  to  lower   Negro  unemployment to   the
current   unemployment  level   of   whites,  the   resulting
gain   in  GNP   (Gross   National  Product)   would  be  $5
billion   .  .  .  National  output  can  be  further  expanded
by  improving  the  average  level  of  productivity.  Educa-
tion  and  training  are  two   means  to  this   end.   If   the
average  productivity of  the  Negro  and  white  laborers
were   equalized   at   the   white   level,   total   production
would   expand   by   $22  billion.   If   both  unemployment
rates  and  productivity  levels  were  equalized,  the  total
output  of  the  economy  would  rise  by  about   $27  billion
.  .  .  This  is  a  measure  of  the  annual  economic  loss  as
a   result  of  discrimination.  Of  course,  to  achieve  this
increase   in  output,   some   resources   would  have   to  be
devoted  to  investment  in  the  human capital  of  America's
Negro  citizens.   This  would  be  an  investment  yielding
important   economic  as   well  as   social   returns   for   the
entire  nation."
—Latest  annual  report   to  Congress  of  the  President's
Council  of  Economic  Advisers,  Jan.  27,  1966.
publishing   abroad.    His   book   "Ward   7"   was  published   in
England  and  is  more  deeply  critical  .than  the  works  for  which
Sinyavsky  and  Daniel  are  soon  to  stand  trial.   The  Tarsis  trip
is  no  doubt   intended   to  offset   world-wide   condemnation   of
the   writers'   trial,   but   the   price   exacted   from   Tarsis   is  so
ignominious   that   it  will  undercut   the  purpose.   Tarsis   illus-
trates  a  new   post-Stalin   method   for   dealing   with   non-con-
formist  writers—locking  them   up  in  insane   asylums.   That's
what  "Ward  7"  is  about.   Forty-nine  French,  German,  Italian,
American  and  British  writers  in  a  letter  to  the  London  Times
Aug.  31  protested  the  forthcoming   trials.   The  London  Times
next   day  published    a  fascinating  account   by  Max    Hayward
of  difficulties  encountered   by  Soviet  writers.    He  reported  the
arrest  last  summer   in  Leningrad   of  a  group  of   intellectuals
for   publishing  an  underground    magazine   called   "The   Bell".
The  name  was  taken  from  the  famous  publication  with  which
the  Russian  liberal  Herzen   waged  war  from  exile  in   London
a  century  ago  on  the  Czarist  regime.   Plus  ca change  .  .  .
To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
/ E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published   every   Monday  except   in   August,   the  last  week   in   December   and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618  Nebraska   Ave..  N.W.,  Washington,  D.  C.    An   independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by   I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:   $6   in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
SK-   to  Eurrmf?;   S2fl  to   I?rnel.    A<=i."  rm!  Afriffi.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED