I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966may23.pdf

============================================================

IPS  — 3rd  Report from  Vietnam
"A  former   rather  high   official   in  the   executive   branch
recently  made  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  we  are  on  a
collision  course  with  China."
—Rep.  Sikes  (D.  Fla.)  in  the  new  Defense   Budget  hear-
ings   before    the  House  Appropriations   Committee,  p.  375.
"China   is   prepared.    Should  the   U.S.   impose   war  on
China,  it  can  be  said  with  certainty  that,  once  in  China,  the
Warnings  We  Should  Heed
U.S.  will  not be  able  to  pull  out,  however many  men  it  may
send  over  and  whatever  weapons  it  may  use,  nuclear weap-
ons  included.   Since  the  14 million  people  of  South Vietnam
can  cope  with  over  200,000 U.S.  troops,  the  650 million peo-
ple  of  China  can  undoubtedly  cope with  10 million  of  them."
—Chou  En-lai  interview  with  a  correspondent   for   the
Pakistani  paper  DAWN  in  Peking  April  10.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  18
MAY  23,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
16  CENTS
Behind  the  Fighting  in  Hue  and  Danang
A  U.S.  Embassy official  in  Saigon  said  to  me,  "Nobody  can
come  out  here  with  an  open  mind  and  not  have  it  changed  by
what  he  sees."    Since  most  VIPs  see  only  U.S.  officials,   it  is
not  surprising  that  their  minds  are  changed   in  the   desired
direction.     Perhaps   mine   is  closed.    Though   I   listened   as
sympathetically  as  I  could  to  officials  of  quite  different  views,
I  must  confess  that  I  heard  nothing  to  change  it.    On  the
contrary,  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  same  exercise  in  self-delu-
sion  so  many  newspapermen   have  observed   in  the  past  was
still  going  on.    I  cite  as  example  a  remark  which   offers   a
clue  to  the  current  crisis  in  Hue  and  Danang.    At  one  of  the
first backgrounders  I  attended  in  Saigon  I  was startled  to  hear
a  briefing  officer  dismiss  the  Buddhist  student   demonstrations.
"The  students,"  he  said,  "don't  represent  anything."
Tranquillizers  as  Policy
I  thought  the  remark  all  the  more   disturbing   because   it
came  from  an   official   who  has  a  reputation   for   intelligence
and  candor.    It  may  well  be  that  if  you  could  run  the  whole
population   of  Saigon  through  a  computer   it  would  turn  out
few  had  ever  heard  of  the  student  protests.    Conceivably  you
might  also  find  that  they  expressed  the  most  widespread   feel-
ings  in  the  country—weariness  with  the  war  and   antagonism
to  the  presence  of  so  many  foreign   troops.    To  dismiss  the
Buddhist  students  out  of  hand  as  unrepresentative   seemed   to
me  very  foolish.   The  students  tend  to  be  the  most   concerned
and  vocal group  in  every  society.  They  are  the  men  and  wom-
en  who  will  soon  be  governing   the  country.    To  decide  that
they  represent  nobody  is  a  comforting  way  to  dismiss  protest,
but  a  sure  way  to  miscalculate  political   forces.     Admittedly
there  are  students  of  varying  opinion  in  Saigon:  pro-war  stu-
dents  and  anti-war  students,  anti-election   students   and   pro-
election  students,  Catholic  students  and  Buddhist  students.  It
is  only  the  latter  the  briefing  officer  was  downgrading.
These  tranquillizing  rationalizations  become  the  premises  of
policy.    Ever  since  the  Buddhist  demonstrations  were  sparked
by  the  removal  of  General  Thi,  there  has  been  a  disposition
in  the  U.S.  Embassy  not  only  to  dismiss  the  demonstrators  as
"just  a bunch  of  Buddhist  beatniks"  but  also  to  hope  the mili-
tary  would  disperse  them  by  force.    This  is  the  historic delu-
sion   that  revolutionary  movements  can   be  scattered   with   a
whiff  of  gunpowder.   There  was  disappointment  that  Ky  did
Now  They  Tell  Us
"The  pilots  would  like  to  see  an  end  to  false  hopes
that  bombing by  itself   could  ever  end  the  war."
—Those   Bombings  in  North  Vietnam,  featured   ar-
ticle  in  Air  Force  and  Space  Digest,  organ  of  the  Air
Force  Association,  for   April   1966.
not  put  down  the  Saigon  demonstrations  by  force  and  that  he
withdrew  his  troops  from  Danang  in  April  after  we  flew  them
there  for  a  confrontation  with  anti-government  troops.    From
several  sources  I  heard  not  only  that  Ky was being  advised  to
precipitate  a  showdown  in  Danang  but  also  that  there   were
promises  of  U.S.  funds  to  rebuild  the  city  if  his  planes  had  to
bomb  out  the  rebels.    There  was  a  strong  current  of   disap-
proval  when  Ky  backed  down  and  promised  elections   instead.
Ky's    attack  on  Danang  last  week  and  the  equivocal  wait-and-
see  attitude  of  the  White  House  seem  to  me  quite  consistent
with  this  underlying  attitude.
The  Irrelevance  of  Ky
At  one  briefing  I  heard   an   officer   object   when   a   corre-
spondent's   question  characterized  the  South   Vietnamese   gov-
ernment   as  a  military  dictatorship.     "There   is  no   military
dictatorship  here  in  the  European  sense,"   the  briefing  officer
said  smoothly,  "Ky  is not  a  Salazar."    He  certainly isn't.    The
junta  of  generals  which  Ky  ostensibly  heads  run  no  such  firm
regime.     The  mercurial  and  clownish  Ky  is  not  to  be  com-
pared  with  Europe's  oldest  and  most  enduring  Fascist  dictator.
But  Portugal's  is  the  kind  of  clerical  authoritarian  regime  the
dominant  forces  in  the  U.S.  establishment  would  welcome  in
South  Vietnam.    Our  No.  1  fear  is  of  elections.    An  Amer-
ican  of  vague  background  I  suspected  was  Cl A—"you  might
say  I'm  in  business,"  he  said—told  me  the  U.S.  was  afraid  if
elections  were  held  "the  liberals  and  the  uneducated  people"
might  win  and   "ask   us  to  leave."     The   U.S.   establishment
fears  even  right-wing  politicians  lest  they  prove  responsive  to
war  weariness.    Even  those  Vietnamese  opposed   to  elections
want  a  more  broadly  based  government.    It  seemed  to  me  an
indication  of  Ky's  unimportance  that  not  a  single  Vietnamese
with  whom  I  talked  about  the  political  future  even  mentioned
him;  it  was  as  though  Ky  were  irrelevant.   The  consensus  is
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 23,1966
(Continued  from  Page  One)
that  the  country does  not  have  a government  in  any  real  sense;
the  differences  are  about  how  to  create  one,  whether  by  elec-
tions  or  by  some  form  of  military-civilian  coalition,  whether
to  make  peace  or  to  make  war.    What  the  U.S.  establishment
fears   is  that  once   representative  government   is  launched,   it
will  be  hard  to  control.    What  our  military  men  desire  is  a
secure  base  while they  carry  on  the  war;  they  want  no  disrup-
tive  experiments in  democracy.    It  is  here  that  military  needs
conflict  with  political  aims.    To  win  the  people  you  have  to
risk  letting  them  express  themselves,  and  that  means  risking
a  government  which might  negotiate  peace.
Like  Russia  in  1917
The  South  Vietnamese are  already beginning  to  "vote  with
their  feet."    This  is  the  meaning  of  the  rising  rate  of  deser-
tions  from  South  Vietnam's  army.    At  JUSPAO  HQ,  a  com-
forting  rationalization has  been   found—the   soldiers  are  not
deserting  to  the  enemy,  they  are  only  going   home  to  their
villages  because  they  are  tired  of  the  war!    But  no  one  recalls
that  this  is  how  the   Russian   Army  began   to  melt   away  in
1917.    They  didn't  join  the  Germans;  they  just  began  to  go
home.    In  South Vietnam as  in  Russia, the  soldiers  want  peace
and  the  peasants  want  the  land.   The  CIA  comforts  itself  be-
cause  there  are  few  if  any  well-known  figures  in  the   National
Liberation   Front.     One   Vietnamese  with  whom   I   discussed
this  pointed  out  that  few  revolutions  have  been  led  by  men
who   were  well  known  before   they   succeeded.     How   many
Russians  in   1917   had  ever  heard  of  an  obscure  fanatic  who
used  the  name  of  Lenin  in  his  Swiss  hideout?    The   handful
of  little  known  Bolsheviks  were  able  to  take  power   because
they  acquiesced  in  soldier desertions  and  peasant  land  seizures.
This  war  and  South Vietnam can  fall  apart  and  into  the  hands
of  the  NLF  in  much  the  same  way.
No   one  can  talk  with  Vietnamese  for  any  length   of  time
without  realizing  that  no  outsider,  however  well  intentioned,
can  solve  their  problems.    A  defeated  Japan  submissively ac-
cepted   a  thoroughgoing   land   reform   and   much   beneficient
social   change  at  American  hands.     But  the   Vietnamese   are
neither  defeated  nor  submissive;  they  are  as  stubborn  and  fa-
natically  determined  as  the  Irish  or  the  Jews.     They'll  fight
us  and  themselves  to  exhaustion.    Religious,  nationalist  and
Communist  passions  are  contending  within  them  all  at  once.
South  Vietnam  in  one  generation  is  passing  through   secular,
national   and   social  struggles   Western    Europe   was   able   to
spread  out  over  three  centuries.    And   our   presence  has  ex-
acerbated  all  these  tensions.    Bitter  feeling  between  Buddhist
.aid  Catholic  may  even  now  be  erupting   in  a  religious  civil
war.    The   appointment  of  General   Cao,   a  Catholic,   as  the
Needles  in  A  Hay-Stack   Dept.
"U.S.   Navy   and   Coast   Guard  units   on   Operation
Market   Time   patrols   yesterday' inspected   439  vessels, '
and  boarded  and  searched  another   568  for  a  total  of
1007.    Two  junks   were   held   and  16  persons   detained
for  further   interrogation."
—US  MACV   press  release,  April  17.
new  commander  of  the  First  Army  Corps,  will  provoke  the
Buddhists.    It  is  an  indication of  how  little  has  changed   and
how  little we  have  learned  that  this  faithful   supporter  of  the
Diem  dictatorship  should  have  been  until  now  in  charge  of
psychological   warfare.    While   the   Catholic   community   in
South  Vietnam,  especially  in  Saigon,  has  been  liberalized  and
split  by the  fresh  winds blowing  through  the  church  ever  since
Pope  John,  U.S.  policy  has  allied  itself  with  the  bitter-enders
who  still  favor  military  dictatorship.
The  CIA  and  Elections
Behind   the   scenes  one  feels  that  in  Vietnam,  as  in   Laos
and   elsewhere,   the  military  and  the  CIA  pursue  their   own
policies  whatever  the  conflicting  directives  and   contradictory
rhetoric  from  Washington.      I  believe  U.S.   influences  had  a
hand  in  the  anti-election  agitation  of  recent  weeks.    An  indi-
cator  of  this,  in  my  opinion,  was  the  sudden   appearance   in
the  political  arena  of  the  normally  non-political    Vietnamese
Confederation   of  Labor.    This  is  one  of  the   tamest   of   the
world's  labor  federations;  it  managed  quiet  well  under  Diem
until  his  last  most  paranoid  period;  it  rarely  calls  strikes.    Its
long  time  head,  Tran   Quoc  Buu,  has  close  and  friendly  rela-
tions  with  the  U.S.  Embassy  which  praises  him  to  visitors  as
a  force  for  democracy.    When  this  force  for   democracy  led
his  troops  into  the   streets   to  demonstrate   against   elections,
some  Embassy  officials  in  off-the-record  comments  to  newsmen
hailed  this  as  a  constructive  development  and  asserted  that  Ky
had  overestimated  the  Buddhist demand  for  elections  and  made
a  mistake  in  giving  in  to  it.    Tran  Quoc  Buu  was  earlier  a
bulwark  of  Brother  Nhu's  dreaded  Can  Lao  secret  police  or-
ganization.    The  CIA,  in  Vietnam  as  in  Germany,  has  tended
to  take  over  much  of  the  leftover  secret  police  apparatus.  Tran
Quoc  Buu,  who  is  sensitive  about  his  Can  Lao  past,  may  have
steered   clear  of  the  CIA  but  I  am  sure  he  would   not   have
demonstrated  against  elections  if  he  thought  the  U.S.   establish-
ment  in  South  Vietnam  was  for  them.
The  military  situation  is  almost  as  frustrating  for  the   U.S.
as  the  political.     The  optimism  the  Americans  in  Saigon  ex-
uded   last   Fall   has   completely   evaporated.     Then,   visiting
newspapermen,  European  as  well  as  American,  were  infected
by  the   exuberant   confidence  of   the   U.S.   establishment    and
It  Looks  As  If  The  CIA  Has  Been  Hiring  Southern  Deputy  Sheriffs  for  Pacification
"They   [the   Americans   training  the  Vietnamese   pacifica-
tion  teams]  are  usually  large  men  with  gnarled  red  faces
and   bulging   midriffs.    The   cynical    American   in   charge
might   be  a  foreman  of  a  construction   gang:  boots  up  on
the  table,  cigar  mashed   between  teeth,  strings  of   hyphen-
ated   obscenities.     In  their  presence  Vietnamese   assistants
smile  uneasily   and  are  clearly  none   too  happy  to  be  told,
possibly   in  fun,  that  they  are  lazy  sons-of-bitches.  .  .  .
"While  the  efficiency  of  the  teams  in  the  harsh  reality  of
the  contested countryside  remains  to be seen,  there's  another
important  aspect  to  this  growing  force  which  is  not stressed
to  visitors.    It  is  that  by  spreading  thousands  of  these  in-
doctrinated  men  (and   later  women)   throughout  the  prov-
inces   the   Government   is   creating    a   formidable   political
weapon.    Elections  are  said  to  be  approaching.    What  these
cadres   tell  the  peasants  could  sway   the  opinions  of  thou-
sands  of  potential  voters.    They   could  be  swayed,  for  ex-
ample,  against   Buddhist   extremism   and  neutralism.      Fur-
thermore  the  cadres  will  be  heavily  armed."
—Gavin  Young  from  Saigon  in  London  Observer  May   8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  23,1966
impressed  by  the  swift  buildup  of  U.S.  men  and  bases.    The
word   was  that   the   U.S.   war  was  not  to  be  confused   with
the  French,   that  our  effort  was  so  much  greater  in  quantitity
as  to  have  become  different  in  quality.   The  Viet  Cong  in  the
path  of  this  steamroller  were  bound  soon  to  be  crushed.    Ex-
perts  as  well  as  novices  were  taken  in,  perhaps   because  they
all   shared   the  natural  tendency  of   industrialized  peoples  to
overestimate  the  material  factorin  war.
This  heady  euphoria  has  vanished.    In  the  U.S.   leadership
on  the  spot—civilian  and  military—there  is  a  sober  realiza-
tion  that  no  quick  solutions  are  in  sight  and  that  a  long,  long
war  lies  ahead.    This  reflects  the  failure  of  the  bombings  in
the  North  to  prevent  a  steady  buildup  of  the  rebel   forces  in
the  South,   and  the  success  of  the  Viet  Cong  in  evading  the
many    "search    and    destroy"    operations    so   flamboyantly
launched  against  them.    They  have  shown  a  frustrating  capac-
ity  to  evade  battle  when  we  seek  it  and  to  strike  when   and
where  we  do  not  expect  it.    All  our  machines,  in  other  words,
have  failed  to  convert  this  from  a  guerrilla  war,  with  all  the
advantages  that  gives  the  rebel  side.
Now  Talking  of  a  Ten-Year  War
The  only optimistic story  I have  seen  since  my  return,  quot-
ing  unnamed  officials  who  expect  a  decisive  turn  for  the  bet-
ter  in  the  war  early  next  year,  seemed   to  emanate  from   the
State  Department.     On  the  other  hand  the  Army's  Chief  of
Staff  Gen.  Harold  K.  Johnson  in  a  little-noticed  speech  in  St.
Louis  (UPI  in  Washington   Daily  News,  May  14)   said  the
fighting  in  South  Vietnam  would  last  for  10 more  years. That
is  as  good  as  saying  forever.
In   Saigon  there  was  talk  of  putting   1,500,000  men   into
South  Vietnam.    It  was  claimed  that  with  this  many  men  we
could  start  at  the  Camau  peninsula   in  the  south  and  "sweep
the  country  clean"  up  to  the  17th  parallel—probably  of  peo-
ple  as  well  as  Viet  Cong.    Judging  from  Korean  war  experi-
ence,  putting   1,500,000  men  into  South  Vietnam  would  re-
quire  mobilization  of  4,500,000.    In  Saigon  one  often   hears
it  said  that  while  we  can't  lose,  we  also  can't   win.    But  I
notice  that  Hanson  Baldwin,  in  arguing  the  case  for  mobiliza-
tion  in  The  Reporter  (May  19),   broaches  a  more  pessimistic
The  Treasurer   Was  A  Busy  Man
..•-•».
"Saigon,   April   14—Death   convict   Dang   Cao   Sach
was   recently   charged   with   misappropriating   500,000
piastres  from  the  relief   funds  reserved  for  flood  vic-
tims  in  Central  Viet  Nam  in  1964  it  was  learned   to-
day.    Sach  was  reportedly  taken  to  the  Saigon  Court
Prosecutor's    office   for   a   hearing   Wednesday   on   the
charges  mentioned.   Sach  had  been  sentenced  to  death
by   the   Special   Court   for   embezzlement   of   7,500,000
piastres  during   his   ten   year   tenure  as   head   of   the
Dalat  Treasury.    He  had  appealed  for  clemency  to  the
Chief   of  State  who  has  not  yet   granted  or  denied   it
to  him."                    —Saigon  Daily  News  April   IS.
possibility   than   stalemate.     He   wrote,   before   the   current
crisis,  that  if  civil  war  broke  out  between  Saigon  and  Hue,  or
if  Ky  used  force  to  prevent  a  Buddhist  neutralist  government
from  taking  power,  the  South  Vietnamese  army  might  disinte-
grate.    "If   this  situation  were  coupled   with  a  strong  Viet-
cong  offensive," Baldwin concluded,  "U.S.  armed  forces  might
well  find  themselves  fighting  for  their   lives."
Like  Spain  in  Cuba
In  a  fundamental  sense  there  is  really  nothing  new  to  re-
port  from  Saigon.  The  war  continues  to  be  based  on  two  ideas,
both  old  and  discredited.    The  first  and  older,  which   aroused
the  U.S.  to  a  high  pitch  of  war  fever  when  practiced   by  the
Spaniards  against  the  Cuban  rebels  in  the  1890's,  is  to   con-
centrate  the  population   of  contested   provinces   in  urban   en-
claves  and  "refugee   camps"   so  that  the  peasants  would   "no
longer  be  permitted   to  fight  as  rebels  one  day  and  appear  as
peaceable  citizens  the  day after.  .  .  . The  countryside was  then
to  be  cleared  of  all  supplies  and  the  starvation weapon  turned
against   the   insurgents."      This   description   of   the   Spanish
"reconcentrado"  policy  by  Walter  Millis  in  The  Martial  Spir-
it,  his  study  of  our  war  with  Spain,  applies  to  our  tactics  in
the  Vietnamese  war.  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  spoke  of  the  "heroic
battle  of  the  patriots"   against  this  kind  of   "cruelty   and  op-
pression"   but  that  Lodge  was  our  Ambassador's  grandfather
and  the  patriots  referred  to  were  Cubans.
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
A  Former  Premier's   Trip  Arouses  Anxiety  in  Vietnam,  But  Cool  Reception  in  U.S.
"Last  week  as  the  height  of  the  political  crisis  hit  full
blast  in  Central  and  South  Vietnam,  two  bits  of  troubling
news  worried  Vietnamese  political  circles   at   the   highest
level.    The  first  had  to  do  with  Bao  Dai:  forgotten   since
1955,  the  ex-Emperor  brusquely  brought  himself   back  to
world   attention  by   a   political   statement   to   the   Tribune
dc  Geneve.    He  declared himself  against  the  pursuit  of  the
war  in  South  Vietnam.   The  second  was  the  arrival  in  the
U.S.  of  ex-Premier Tran  Van  Huu, who  is  said  to  have  en-
countered  the   Secretary  General   of   the   UN   and  various
American  political  personalities.    It  is  known  that  M.  Tran
Van  Huu  professes   a  French  version  of  neutralism,  favor-
able  to  the  VC.    This  point  of  view  has  always   been  re-
jected  by  the  U.S.A.   In  spite  of  this,  many  fear  a  change
of   policy  on  the   part   of  American  leadership  because   of
the  troubles  still  disturbing  Central  Vietnam  and  certain
anti-American  slogans.    Perhaps  it   will  be  found   worth-
while,  by  an  official  declaration, to    dissipate  these  rumors
about  M.  Tran  Van  Huu's  trip."
—Page  one  editorial  in  Le  Viet  Nam  Nouveau,  Saigon,
April  19,  a  semi-official    mouthpiece    (abridged).
"Tran   Van   Huu,  a   Premier  of   South   Vietnam   in   the
days  of   Emperor  Bao   Dai,  suggests   that  the  first  move
toward  peace  must  come  from  the  U.S..    Huu, 70,  has  lived
in  Paris  the  last  7  years.    Winding up  a  month's  visit  to
the  U.S.  he  said,  'I  am  sure  that  if  the  Americans  stopped
the  war,  the  others   would,  too.    The  call  to  a  truce  can
come  only  from   the  mightiest.'    Huu  said  he  had  spoken
to  Washington  officials   last   week  about  a   possible   truce
'but   there  hasn't   been  any   echo.    I  have  the  impression
that  peace  is  not  for  tomorrow.'  he  added  wryly.    'When
we  will  have  burned  Viet  Nam  to  ashes,  there  will  not  be
any  conflict.'
"Huu  said  hostilities   should  be  stopped  to  prepare  a  cli-
mate  for  negotiations  and  the  U.S.  should  negotiate  with
the  Viet  Cong's  National  Liberation  Front.    'In  a  case  as
hard   as   this,'  he  explained,  'we   must   talk   to   the  worst
enemies.'     But   he   said   that   while   some   in  Washington
wanted  negotiations, they  did  not  want   to  hear  about   Ho
Chi  Minh,  and  while  they  wanted  to  get  peace in  the  South,
they  did  not  want  to  hear  about  the  NLF."
—AP  in  New  York  Post,  May  6.
1   ',
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, May  S3,1966
The  Realities  Behind  the  Honolulu  Declaration
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
The  other,  newer  idea  is  that  of  "la  guerre revolutionnture"
which  the  defeated  French  military  worked  out  after   Dien-
bienphu  and  tried  unsuccessfully to apply  in  Algeria.   A mix-
ture  of  counter-terror,   totalitarian  organization  of  the  popula-
tion  and  promises  of  a  "social  revolution"  is  the  formula  for
winning   the   people   from   the   insurgents,   "pacifying"   the
countryside   and   smothering  the   rebellion.     The   idea   is  to
apply  Marxist  and  Maoist  ideas  in  reverse.    But  Communism
in  reverse  is  Fascism,  the  use  of  police  state  methods,  thought
control  and  a  one-party  system to  safeguard  the  status  quo.  A
briefing  officer,  explaining to me the  "social  revolution"  prom-
ised  by  the  Honolulu  Declaration,  outlined  step  by  step  how
the  Communists  take  over  and  organize  a  village,   and  .then
showed  step  by  step  how  we  plan  to  imitate  them.    It  never
seemed   to  have  occurred   to  him  that   imitating   Communist
methods,  even  in  reverse,  was  a  strange  way  to  build  democ-
racy.    Our   pacification  procedure   begins  with  a  "census  of
grievances."     This  in  practice  seems  to  be  a  method  for  re-
cruiting  informers  by  intimidation.   CIA  teams  are  to  inter-
rogate  one  villager  after  another  in  private  to  spot  and  weed
out  VC  sympathizers.
McCarthyism  Plus  Social Welfare
The  classic  way—at  least  as  old  as  the  Spanish  inquisition
—to  certify  one's own  orthodoxy  in  interrogations of  this kind
is  to  inform  on  others.    The  quality  of  such  information  is
apt  to  be  so  unreliable as  to  set  off  a  chain  reaction  of  unjust
condemnations  and   intensified   resentment.    The   pacification
teams  operate  under  a  high-sounding   Ministry  of   Revolution-
ary   Development.     Under   the   surface  of   the  revolutionary
verbiage,  the   formula   adds  up  to  McCarthyism  plus  social
welfare  measures.     It  is  as  if  teams  of  armed  McCarthyites
with  CIA  training were sent  into  the  small  towns  and villages
of  the  United  States  to  weed  out Reds,  pinkoes  and  peaceniks.
A  briefing  officer  explained  to  me  naively that  in  training  the
pacification   teams  we  had  been  using  a  large  proportion   of
Vietnamese  belonging  to  the  ultra-right  Dai  Viet  and  Viet-
Replies  Which  Strain  Our Credibility
Mr.  Daniel  J.  FLOOD  (D.  Pa.): Are  you  getting  any
fall  in  morale  of  our  bomber  pilots  and  fighter  pilots
from   the   Air  Force  or  fleet  because  you  have  these
top-flight  people,  and  hardware, sacrificing their  lives,
or  endangering  their  lives,  to  knock  out  a  couple  of
1-ton  trucks  on  a  road?    I  am  talking  about  morale.
Secretary  McNAMARA:  My  answer  is  no.
—Newly   released  House  Appropriations   Committee
hearing  on  the  1967 Defense   Dept.  Budget,  p.  S7S.
namese  Kuomintang  parties  because  we  "needed  an  ideology
stronger  than  democracy" with  which to  combat  Communism!
He   did   not   seem   to   realize   the   full   implications  of   this
confession.
For  Revolution Until One  Breaks Out
No  country  has  been  promised  social  revolution  more  often.
As  early  as  1950  the  French  were  saying that  pacification  de-
pended  on winning the  hearts and  minds of  the  peasants  with
social  reform.    Diem  promised  a  social  revolution.    So  did
Gen.  Khanh.    So did  Marshal  Ky  and  Lyndon  Johnson.     No
country  talks  more  of  revolution  than  ours,  but  none  is  more
counter-revolutionary   in   practice.     In   Vietnam  as   in   Latin
America,  we  are  allied  with  the  forces  which  oppose  social
change  because  they  stand  to  lose  by it.    We  are  always  shop-
ping  around  for  gimmicks  that  sound  revolutionary  without
threatening  to  disturb  the  status  quo.     "Somebody   had   the
idea,"  a  briefing  officer  told  me,"  of  introducing  the  concept
of   People's  Capitalism  into  the   pacification  program.     His
proposal  was  to  get  the  villagers  to  invest  their   money  in
municipal  and  government  bonds."    The  officer  added  regret-
fully  that  "this  proved  to  be  too  sophisticated  and  had  to  be
dropped."    I  half  expected  to  hear  that  the  same  genius  was
going  to  convert  Viet  Cong  by  giving  them  stock  in   Texas
Gulf  Sulphur.
.     Next  Week: A Visit  to  Cambodia and How The
NLF  Sees  Negotiation
Why   Not  Start  A  Gift  Sub With  These  On-the  Spot  Reports  from  Vietnam  and  Cambodia
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
I. F. Stone's Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew  (or  enter)   a  snb  for  the'enclosed  |5:
Name  .......„..............................................................................—
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6/2S/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  «nb  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Z«ie............SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftie*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
1.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week   in  December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington,   D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published   and   edited
by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.   Esther   M.  Stone.     Subscription:   »6   in   the   U.S.:   $6  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   (20  to  Israel,   Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED