I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jun13.pdf

============================================================

The  UN  and  the  Vietnam Elections, P.  2
Just  For  Once
Negroes might  wire the President  to let  a volunteer  batal-
lion  of  Negro  troops  march  as  a  guard  of  honor  through
Mississippi   with   those   who  are  taking   up  where   James
Meredith  fell.    Negro  soldiers  helped  put  down  the  revolt  in
Santo  Domingo.    They  help  man  the  "frontiers  of  freedom"
in  Germany.   They  fight  in  Vietnam.    They  ought  just  for
once  to  have  a  chance  to  uphold  the  rights  of  man—and  of
their  own  people—at   home.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  21
JUNE  13,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Freedom  of  the  Press  and  the  CIA
Two  new  disclosures  have  been  added  to  our   knowledge
of  the  Bay  of  Pigs.    One,  by  Mr.  Clifton  Daniel,   managing
editor  of  The  New  York  Times,  reveals  how  easily  the  Presi-
dent  himself  becomes  the  prisoner  of  events  set  in  motion  by
the  CIA  and  of  the  standards  established  to  cover  up  its  ac-
tivities.    In  a  talk  to  the  World  Press  Institute  June  1,  Mr.
Daniel  told  of  a  meeting  at  the  White  House  several  weeks
after  the  Bay of  Pigs  when  President  Kennedy  scolded  news-
paper  editors  for  "premature  disclosures  of  security  informa-
tion",  mentioning  among  other  items  the  New   York  Times
story  about  the  training  of  anti-Castro  forces  for  that  inva-
sion  by  the  CIA  in  Guatemala.    But  at  the  very  same  time,
in  an  aside  to  Turner  Catledge,  executive  editor  of  the  Times,
the  President  said,  "If  you  had  printed  more  about  the  Bay
of  Pigs  operation  you  would  have  saved  us  from  a  colossal
mistake."
Censorship  by  "Self-Restraint"
Jefferson  would  have  loved  that  anecdote  and  felt  that  its
implications  were  inescapable.    But  I  see  little  evidence  that
they  are  understood.    Certainly  President   Kennedy  did  not
understand   them,   for  he  was  pleading  with  the  editors  to
print  less  rather  than  more  about  cold  war  cloak-and-dagger
activities  in  the  future.   Nor,  I  am sorry to  say, have  adequate
lessons   been   drawn   from   the   incident   by  the   New   York
Times.     In   practice,   notably   in   its  Vietnam   coverage  and
comment,   and   -despite  White   House   pressure   from   both
Kennedy  and  Johnson,  it  has  grown  more  independent.    But
the  editorial  it  reprinted  last  Sunday  on  "Freedom   and  the
Press"  as  a  guide-line  is  deplorably  weak.    The  editorial  ap-
peared  originally  April  28,   1961,   in  response  to  Kennedy's
post-Bay  of  Pigs  demand  for  "self-restraint",   i.e.  self-censor-
ship  by  the  press.     The   editorial   shows  how  far   we  have
drifted  from  die spirit  of the  First  Amendment.    "No  formula
can  be  entirely  satisfactory,"   it  said.    "Certainly   censorship
is  not,  and  complete  license  is  not,  either.    The  best  for  the
moment  is  to  take  seriously  the  President's   request  for   self-
restraint.    Along  with  this  ought  to  go  greater  accessibility
of   officials,   so  that  newspapermen   may  have  frank   and   in-
formed  advice  on  the  harm  that  might  come  from  revelation
of   a  discovered  secret."     This,  is  an  invitation  to  be  taken
into  camp.   There  is entirely  tod  much  of  this   "accessibility",
this  "frank  and  informed  advice",  in  Washington.    To  sup-
press  the  truth  in  the  name  of  national  security  is  the  surest
way  to  undermine  what  we  claim  to  be  preserving.    There
Few  Smiles  Anywhere
"What  the  returning  correspondent   quickly  observes
after  an  absence  of  some  eight  months  is  a  new  surli-
ness  towards the foreigner.  . .. Not long  ago,  a  foreign
smiling   face   would  quickly  break   the   ice.    Now  the
unsmiling  eyes  turn  aside."
—The  Times  (London)  from its man in Saigon, June 4
"Now  what  I  was  hearing  from  all  of  those  central
Pennsylvania  counties  was  that  we've  either  got  to  end
this  war  or  we've  got  to  find  a  way  to  settle  it  which
is  honorable  to  the  United  States  or  else  we  have  no
right  being   in  there.     I've   never  seen  the  people   so
frustrated  and  so   disturbed."
—Sen.  Hugh  Scott  (R.  Pa.),  on Pa.  radio-TV,  June  6
"Fewer  Americans  today  express  confidence   in  the
way  President  Johnson  is  handling  his  job  than  at  any
previous  time  .  .  .  [since]  he  has  been  in  office ... a
chief   reason  is  the  Vietnam  situation."
—George  Gallup,  Washington  Post,  June  5;  his  poll
showed  approval   of  LBJ  dropped   from   6S%  at   begin-
ning  of  this  year  to  54%  in  May  and  46%  in  June.
is  a  Latin  legal  maxim—justitia  pat,  ruat  coelum:  Let  justice
be  done  though  the  heavens  fall.    I  would  paraphrase  it  for
newspapermen  and  say,  Let  the  truth  be  told   as  we  see  it
though  officials  claim  the  disclosure  would  cause  the  heavens
to  collapse  upon  them.*
The  other  new  disclosure  about  the  Bay of  Pigs  shows  that
intimate  knowledge  within  the  confines  of  a  small  elite  is  no
substitute  for  untrammeled  freedom  of  the  press.    The  dis-
closure  was  made  by  Senator  Russell  of  Georgia  on  the  floor
of  the  Senate  May  16.   Russell  is chairman of  that  select  little
subcommittee  of  Appropriations  and  Armed  Services   which
has  jurisdiction  over  the  CIA.    The  existence  of  this  subcom-
mittee  is  always  cited  against  any  proposal  for  stricter   super-
vision,  even  so  mild  a  one  as  Fulbright's  for  adding  three
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
* "Reasons  of  state"  was  the  excuse  in  18th  Century  Eng-
land  for  restrictions   on  reporting.    In  the  landmark  freedom
of  the  press  case  against  John  Wilkes,  Lord  Mansfield  ruled,
"The  Constitution  does  not  allow  reasons  of  state  to  influ-
ence   our  judgment.    God  forbid   it  should.    We  must   not
regard  political  consequences,  however  formidable  they  might
be;  if  rebellion  was  the  certain  consequence,  we  are  bound
to  say  'justitia  fiat,  ruat  coelum.'"   It's  a  sad  day  when  we
have  to  learn  from  George  Ill's  judges.
8  .i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  13,1966
The  UN  Would  Be  Guilty  of  Colossal  Gullibility  If  It   Took   Saigon's  Invitation
What  Is  There  to  Observe  in  Elections  Rigged  in  Advance?
Effrontery   is  the  only  word  for   the  Johnson  Administra-
tion's  effort  to  get  the  .United  Nations  to  observe  the  South
Vietnamese   elections.     The   only   effect   can  be  to  .hurt   the
reputation  of  the  UN  in  the  minds  of  the  unthinking.   Ask-
ing  the  UN   to  observe  elections   in  Vietnam   is  like  asking
the  Warsaw  Pact  to  observe  elections  in  Mexico. •  The  only
international   body   on   which   both   sides   are   represented   is
that  established  by  the  Geneva  conference  in  1954,  as  Sena-
tor  Mansfield  was  quick  to  point  out.    Russia  and  France  are
sure  to  veto  any  such  proposal.     Why,  then,  make  it  except
as  another  public  relations  phoney?
McCarthyite  Election  Standards
But  this  is  not  the  whole   story.    The   South   Vietnamese
government  was  careful  to  make  clear  that  it  was  asking  the
UN  not  to  supervise  the  elections  but  merely  to  observe  them.
There   is  quite  a   difference.     The   circumstances   and   terms
make  these   elections  a  farce.    General   Ky  has  said   that   if
they  should   return   an  Assembly  which  wanted   to   negotiate
peace  the  military  would  overthrow   it.     "The   Election  Law
drafting   committee,"   the  government   controlled   radio  an-
nounced   in  Saigon  May  31,  "decided   yesterday  that  any  per-
son  who  works  for  the  Viet  Cong  and  for  neutralization,  di-
rectly  or  indirectly,  will  not  be  eligible  to  run  for  the  con-
stituent  assembly."
For  the  military  McCarthyites  and  hard-line  fanatics  who
run  the  show  in  Saigon  that  is  broad  enough  to  bar  any  but
the  most  fervent pro-war candidates.   It  is  to  be  noted  in  this
connection  that  the  only  two  parties  which  seem  to  be  able
to  operate  at  all  in  South  Vietnam  today,  the  only  two  ever
mentioned  there  or  in  the  news  dispatches,  are  the  Dai  Viet,
an  extreme right ultra-nationalist movement,  and  the NQVDD,
known  as  the  South  Vietnamese  Kuomintang  party  because  it
was   long   a   satellite  of   Chiang   Kai-shek's   movement   and
shares  its  outlook.
A  No.   1 question  is  how  do  you have  a  free  election  with-
out  a  free  press ?   How  do  you  have  free  choice  if  candidates
cannot  express  themselves  freely?    What  is  there  to  observe
in  an  election  of  this  kind?    Observing  such  an  election  is
like  observing a  rigged  roulette  wheel  with  no  power  except
McNamara  Sees Buddhist  Pacifist
The   Buddhist   poet-monk,   Thich   Nhat   Hanh,   whom
we  interviewed   in  Saigon  (see   the  Weekly  for  May  16)
was  received  in  friendly   audience  by  Secretary  of  De-
fense  McNamara  June  2.    Next  day  Thich  Hanh  held
a  press  conference  at  which  he  presented  a  5-point  pro-
gram   for  peace.    This  called  for   an  end  to  bombing
North  and  South;  limitation   of  all  military   action  to
the  defensive—a  cease-fire  if  the  Viet  Cong  respond;  a
"convincing  demonstration"  of   U.S.   readiness  to  with-
draw  over  a specified  period  of  months"; " a  clear state-
ment  of  U.S.  desire  to  help  the  Vietnamese  people  have
a   government   truly   responsive"  to  their  will   and  an
offer  to  aid  in  reconstruction,  "such  aid  to  be completely
free  of  ideological  and  political  strings."    He  said  the
war   was   killing   "far   more  innocent   peasants"  than
Viet   Cong  and  that   while   he  was  anti-Communist  "I
do  not  declare  that  in  Vietnam.    People  who  read  my
writings   know   that   I   am   anti-Communist   but   I  am
afraid   of   identifying   myself   with   the   dollar-making
people.    Anti-Communism  has  become  a  real  business
in  South  Vietnam."
to  check  the  croupier's  arithmetic.
Mansfield  Comes  To  Cambodia's  Defense
Our  military-intelligence establishment  has  long  been   hos-
tile to Cambodia and  itching  for  a chance to  invade  that  poorly
defended   little  neutral  country  as  the  Germans  did   neutral
Belgium  in  World  War  I.    Everyone  concerned  with  elemen-
tary   fairness  will   be  grateful   to   Senator   Mansfield  for   his
latest  statement,  which  attempts  to  correct  the  hostile   propa-
ganda  campaign  of  Pentagon  and  CIA.    The  Senate  majority
leader  said  that  "on  the  basis of  specific  knowledge"  he  knows
of  no  firm  basis  for  the  effort  to  picture  Cambodia  as  a  sanc-
tuary  for  Viet  Cong  and  North  Vietnamese  troops.     Senator
Mansfield  performed  a  service  to  peace  in  calling  attention  to
Prince  Sihanouk's  offer  to  let  the  International  Control  Com-
mission  set  up  by  the  Geneva  convention,  police  his  borders
and  also investigate the allegation  that his port of  Sihanoukville
is  being  used  to  transship  arms  to  the  rebels  and  North  Viet-
nam.    This  offer  has  been  ignored  generally  by  the  press  and
of  course  by  our  military.
Johnson  Bestows  A  Founding  Father  on  Vietnam  To  Write  Its  New   Constitution
One  of  the  cutest  ploys  of  the  White  House  was  to  send
Prof.   John   P.   Roche   of   Brandeis  to  help  the  Vietnamese
write  a  Constitution.     He  is  now  in  Saigon.    His  mission
there   was   confirmed    by   the   Washington   Post   May   27
through  Administration   sources.    Prof.  Roche  is  a  former
national  chairman   of  the  ADA  who  split   with  it  over  the
war.    He  has  become  one  of  the  intellectuals  on  whom   the
White   House   relies.    An   article   by   him,   "Why   I  Oppose
Vietnam  Critics",   was  reprinted   with  permission  from   the
Detroit   News  in  the  April  issue  of   Air   Force  and  Space
Digest,  organ  of  the  Air  Force  Association.    There  he  was
introduced  as  "a  distinguished  liberal  thinker."
The  Constituent   Assembly  which  is  supposed  to  write  a
Constitution  for  South  Vietnam   has  yet  to  be  elected,  but
an  outsider,   an  American,   and  a  pro-war   liberal   at  that,  is
already    in    Saigon    helping    the    military     junta     frame
a  satisfactory   document.     This  is  how  it  will   look  to  the
Vietnamese,  and they  may  not  consider  this  a  model  of  self-
determination.
•   Vietnamese  may   recall   as   few   Americans  will   that   the
Diem  dictatorship  was  inaugurated  under  a  Constitution  an
American   expert   helped   him  write   in  1956.     The  story   is
told  in  Bernard  B.  Fall's,  The  Two  Vietnams.    The  expert
was  Prof.  J.A.C.  Grant  of  California.   This  charter  for  what
was  then  supposed  to  become  a  democratic  state  obligingly
provided  that  the  President  of  the  Republic  could  by  decree
suspend  virtually  all  civil  rights  "to  meet  the  legitimate  de-
mands  of  public  security  and order  and of  national  defense."
It  was  under  such  emergency  powers  that  Diem  filled  his
concentration  camps  with   opponents  of   all  kinds  and  ex-
tended  his  own  term  in  office  until  he  was  overthrown  in
1963.    After  that  experience,  the  Vietnamese  may  not  care
to  have  another  American   Founding  Father,  especially  one
picked   for   them  by   Lyndon  Johnson.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  13,1966
Some  Cynical  Reflections   on  Our  Man  Balaguer's  Victory  Over  Juan   Bosch
Why  Dominicans  May Be Conditioned  to  Voting  As We  Want  Them  To
On  the  eve  of  our  armed  occupation   of  the  Dominican  Re-
public  in   1916,   Woodrow  Wilson's  Ambassador   assured  its
people  "in  the  opinion  of  the  United  States  there  is  no  griev-
ance  which   now  exists  or  can  exist  which   justifies  resort  to
arms".    The  people  could  always  "demand  a  fair  ballot".    In
the  future  baseball  should  provide  them " a  real  substitute  for
the  excitement  of  revolutions."     We  offer  these  gems  to  Lyn-
don  Johnson's  ghost  writers;  he  might  like  to  use  them  again.
Fifty  Years  of  Misery
Little  more  than   a  year  after   a  liberal  candidate   we  op-
posed  was  defeated  in  a  U.S.   supervised   election  (this  sounds
like  eternal   recurrence!),  we  had  to  send   in  the  Marines   to
put   down   a  popular   revolt.     They   stayed   eight   years.    Six
years  after   the   Marines   left,   a  constabulary   chief   they   had
trained  established  a  dictatorship  and  ruled  for  30  years  more.
In  the  50 years  since  the  Marines  first  landed,  the  Dominicans
have  only  had  12  unstable  years  of  precarious   freedom.     The
only  peace  they  have  known  was  when  they  accepted  rule  by
us  or  a  dictator  satisfactory  to  us.    The  lesson  is  that  the  way
for  Dominicans  to  avoid  trouble  is  to  give  in  to  U.S.  wishes.
Perhaps—if  it  was  an  honest  election—that  is  why  a  majority
voted   for  Trujillo's   lifelong   retainer,   our  favorite,   Balaguer,
the  choice  of  both  the  American  and  Dominican  military  over
Juan  Bosch.    Baseball  is  still  a  safer  pastime  for  Dominicans
than  politics.
The  U.S.  operates  on  a kind  of  heads  we win,  tails  you  lose
principle  with  the  Dominican   Republic,  as  with  many  of  our
Latin   neighbors.    We   are  always  plaguing  them,   as  Bolivar
once  complained,   "with  misery  in  the  name  of  liberty."  When
a  dictator   arises  who  plays  ball  with  U.S.   oil  and   sugar   in-
terests,  we  forget  about  liberty.   When  a  liberal  gets  himself
elected,   as  Bosch  did  in  1962,   we  look   the  other  way  as  the
military  overthrow  him.    If  the  people  revolt  and  try  to  re-
store  him  and  constitutional  government,   we  stifle  the   revolu-
Political  Satire  Returns  to  the  Capital
For  the  first  time  since  the  loyalty  purge   and  the
cold  war,  a  professional   group  here,   the   Washington
Theatre   Club,   has   put   on   a   political   satire,    Spread
Eagle.    It  takes  on  the  Vietnamese  war,  the   Johnson
Administration,  the  Kennedy  brothers  and  Mayor  Lind-
say  of  New  York.    E.  Y.  Harburg,  Russell   Baker,  Eve
Merriam,  Sue  Lawless,  Herb Sufrin and  Richard Linge-
man  are  among  those  who  wrote  the  skits.    One  of  the
best,  "1,000  Nights",   satirizes  the  Tonkin  Bay  reprisal
raids  when  we  were  threatened  "by  remarkably  hostile
radar  blips."    Rusk's  "multi-lateral  sampan  force"  also
appears  in  this  skit.    Another,  by  Russell  Baker,  has  a
Senatorial  hawk  explaining that  "the  only  way  we  can
achieve  our  goal  of  unconditional peace  is  through  un-
conditional   war."     This   musical   revue   will   play   in
Washington   only  until  June   26  but  might  be  coaxed
into   the   summer   theatre   circuit.    We   applaud  and
cheer   it.
tion  by  armed   intervention   as  we  did   last  year.    Then   we
hold  elections.    If  our  favorite wins,  all  is  well  until  popular
dissatisfaction   threatens  to  overthrow  him.     If   the  man   we
oppose wins,  we stand  aside and  let the  military get  rid  of  him.
This has  been  the  familiar  pattern  of  Dominican  politics  under
the  U.S.   shadow   for  almost  a  century.    How  free  a  choice  is
it  when   a  small  country  knows   from   bitter  experience   that
unless  it  elects   a  man  satisfactory  to  U.S.  business  and  mili-
tary  interests,  it  may  face  a  U.S.  encouraged  military  takeover?
And  that  when  the  military  takes  over,  they  may  shoot  those
who  opposed  them?
So  there  is  a  rational  explanation  for  Bosch's  defeat.     Per-
haps  it  is  a  correct  one.     But  we  find   it  hard  to  believe  that
the  Johnson  Administration,  with  all  the  secret  "contingency"
funds  and  secret  agents  with which  we  now  so  plentifully  sup-
ply  the  Presidency,  really  kept  hands  off  in  this  election,  when
a  victory  for   Bosch  would   have  been  a  defeat   for  Johnson.
Johnson's   (Too)  Masterly  Sleight-of-Hand  at  the  Civil  Rights Conference
The  White   House   Conference  "To  Fulfil   These   Rights"
was   a  model  of   manipulated  public  relations.     The  dele-
gates  were  hand-picked and  the  recommendations prefabri-
cated.   The  main  feat  was  to  shut  off  discussion  of  Vietnam.
The  Administration wheeled out  Walter Reuther  and  Arthur
Goldberg  to  assure  the  delegates  at  a  press  conference that
foreign  policy  had  no  place  in  such  a  conference.   But many
of   the  moderates   would  have  appreciated some  discussion
of   just   how   the   escalating   costs   of   this   escalating   war
could  be  reconciled  with  the  kind  of  major  steps   necessary
to  head  off  serious  racial  conflict   at  home.
Herbert  Hill  of  the  NAACP  indicated the  real  dimensions
of  the  task.    In  a  sober  and  detailed  report,  he  outlined  a
10-year  plan  of   housing,   health,  education  and   urban  re-
newal  to  cost  $50 billion a  year  and create  at  least  6 million
new   jobs.     This   includes  proposals   to   meet   the   growing
water  and  transit  needs  of  urban  areas.    But  no  such  bold
and  creative   program   is   thinkable   in  the   atmosphere  of
hostility  to  social  reform  created  by  the  war,  even  if  room
for  it  could  somehow  be  made  in  a  budget  swollen  by  war
costs  and  shadowed  by  fear  of   inflation.
The  main  concern  of  those  who  ran  the  show  was  to  pre-
vent   real  discussion.     But  here   again,   even  from  the  Ad-
ministration's  point   of   view,  the  White   House  outsmarted
itself.    The  Conference  left   many  delegates   confused  and
despairing.    Much  might  have  been  learned from  them, but
what  they  had  to  say  was  confined  to  a  multitude  of  small
committee  hearings,  too  many  for  adequate coverage.    The
Administration  gave  way  on  its  original  idea  of  permitting
no  recommendations  and  no  votes,  but  refused   to  allow   a
plenary  session  where  much useful  criticism  from  the locali-
ties  and  many  constructive suggestions  might   have  had  a
hearing.
One  of  the  subjects  thus  muffled  was  criticism  of  the  FBI
in  civil  rights.    This   was   expressed   in  several  committee
sessions.    Dr.  Arnold  S.  Trebach,  director  of   the   Howard
University  Human  Rights  Program,  said  the  recommenda-
tions  on  administration  of  justice  in  the  Conference report
could  not  be   implemented   "unless   we  can   deal"  with   the
problem  of  the  FBI.    He  called  for  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  re-
placement   as  soon  as  possible   "not   by  a  man  of  his  own
choosing  but  by  an  individual  of  the  calibre  of   a  Supreme
Court  Justice."   He  called  Hoover  and  the  FBI  the "number
one  untouchables  of  our  society"  and  proposed  a  Congres-
sional  investigation  of  the  FBI  to  determine  "its  impact  on
civil   rights."    This,   too,  was   brushed  under   the  rug.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  IS, 1966
Of  What   Public  Use  Was  Senator  Russell's  Private   Knowledge?
(Continued  from  Page   One)
members  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations to  it.    Stennis of  Missis-
sippi,  another  defender  of  the  CIA,  praised  Russell's  super-
visory  work  and  said  he  gave  CIA  activities  "the most  rigid
attention  and  the  closest  scrutiny."
So  They  Didn't  Consult  Him!
In  the  Bay  of  Pigs  affair   the  CIA  must  have  decided  that
this  scrutiny was  too  close  for  comfort.    Russell,  in  a remark-
able  burst  of  candor,  told  the  Senate  "I  only wish  I  had  been
consulted,  because  I  would  have  strongly  advised  against  this
kind  of  operation   if  I  had  been.    That  may  have  been  one
reason  I  was  not  consulted.    My  position  was  well-known."
He  went  on  to  say,  "I  knew  about  the  plans,  but  I  did  not
know  about  the  timing  of  it."    Perhaps  the  timing  was  kept
from  him  for  fear  that  he  might  protest  to  the  White  House
as  he  could  have  done  if  he  had  known   the  invasion  was
imminent.    This  is  hardly  a  testimonial  to  the  efficacy  of  the
supervision   he  exercises.     Nor   does  it  warrant  the   compla-
cency   with   which   the   Georgian   blamed   the   "clamor"   for
stricter  control  on  "a  segment  of  the  press  which  feels   that
it,  and  it  alone,  can  properly   direct  the  Government   of  the
United  States."    As  it  happens,  those  who  first  exposed   the
preparations  for  the  Bay of  Pigs—the  Guatemalan  newspaper
La  Hora,  Ronald  Hilton  of  the  now  defunct  Hispanic-Ameri-
can  Institute  at  Stanford,  The  Nation  and  Paul  P.  Kennedy
of  the  New   York  Times—turn  out  to  have  been  better pro-
tectors   of   the  public  interest  than  Russell  and  his   subcom-
mittee.
Even  now  Russell  only  hints  at  the  whole  truth.     "I  did
not  think  the  operation  had  a  chance  of  success,"  he  told  the
Senate,  "unless  it  had  active support  from  the  United  States,"
i.e.   unless   the   Cuban   exiles   were   supported   by  American
ships,  planes  and  troops.   What  he  says  leads  us  to  believe
that  the  invasion  was  intended  to  draw  the  U.S. itself   into
war  with  Cuba.   "I  do not  think  the  President  was completely
responsible,"   Russell  said.    "There  was  confusion  about  the
views of  the  Joint Chiefs of  Staff.   There was a  series  of  tragic
errors.    The  CIA  made  a  mistake,  in  my  opinion,  in  telling
the  President  they  thought  this  operation  had  a  good  chance
More  on  Father  Quynh  and  The  Military Junta
We  report  an  odd  sequel  to  the  story  in  last  week's
issue   about  the   manifesto  issued   in   Saigon  by   the
Catholic  refugee leader,  Father  Quynh,  and  a  Front  of
Citizens   of   Various   Religions   calling  for   the   resig-
nations  of  Generals Thieu and  Ky.    Readers  will  recall
that  this  manifesto  was  made  public  on  May  26,  that
the  only  paper  which  published  it  was  suppressed  next
day  and  that  a  day  later  Father  Quynh  broadcast  an
ambiguous  disavowal.    Now  we  learn  that  on  June  3,
Father  Quynh  called  a  press  conference  in  Saigon  and
in  almost  the  same  words  and  on  behalf  of  the  same
joint  religious  group  issued  a  new  call  for  Thieu  and
Ky  to  step  down.   The  only  difference was  that  he  also
called  on  the   Unified  Buddhists  "to  stop  immediately
some   extremists   who  are   fomenting  trouble."    This
seems   to  have  precipitated  new  pressure   on   Father
Quynh.     On  June   7  the   government-controlled  radio
broadcast  an  interview in  which  Father  Quynh  said  he
had  resigned   from  the  7-man  Presidium  of   the  hard-
line  Catholic Citizens  Front,  and  did  not  speak  for  it.
of  success.   My own view of it... was that  no  1500 men who
ever  lived  or  fought  could  be  put  ashore  under  the  situation
that  then  existed  in  Cuba  and  expect  to  get  a  foothold   there.
But  the  Joint  Chiefs  interlaced  their  views  with  all  kinds  of
suggestions  about  support  by U.S.  forces.   There was  a  carrier
just  out  of  sight,   off  the  shores  of  Cuba,  over  the   horizon.
I  am  not  too  sure  whether  our  ships  were  to  be  used  as  sup-
port."    It  is  to  President   Kennedy's   credit  that  he  drew  a
firm  line  against  direct  U.S.  military  involvement.    But  what
was  the  good  of  Russell's  private  knowledge  as a  Senator  if  he
could  neither  make  it  public  nor  act  upon  it?    Not  the  least
of  the  indictments  against  the  existence  of  a  cloak-and-dagger
agency  like  CIA  is  that  it  forces  us  to  fight  again  a  battle  we
thought  had  been  won  with  the  framing  of  the  Constitution.
Must  we  now  reargue  the  case  for  a  free  press  and  free  dis-
cussion  as  the  only  reliable  safeguards  of  the  country's  secu-
rity ?   If  they  are  indeed  incompatible  with  the  kind  of  secret
activities  carried  on  by  the  CIA  in  violation  of   international
law,  then  the  answer  is  to  end  these  activities,  not  to  limit
freedom  of  the  press.
You  Con Still Start  A  Gift  Sub With  Stone's  Four  On-Hie-Spot  Reports  from  Vietnam  and  Cambodia
(They'll  Soon  Be  Exhausted)
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  snb  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6/18/66
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift   rah   to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............SUte....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifttet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave..  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  lait  week   in   December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.. Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:    S5   in   the   U.S.;   $6  in   Canada:   $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED