I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jul25.pdf

============================================================

Who  Gives  The Negro  Lessons in  Violence?  P.  2
Appeal  to  A  Calloused  Conscience
"They  (the  Americans) have  resorted to extremely savage     President  Johnson: Reply  publicly.  .  .  .  Who has  sabotaged
means  of  warfare: Toxic chemicals,  napalm,  etc.   They have     the  Geneva  agreements?  .  .  .  Have  Vietnamese  troops  in-
applied  the  'burn  all,  kill  all  and  destroy  all'  policy.  .  .  .     vaded  the  United  States  and  massacred  the  Americans?"
—From  Ho  Chi  Minh's  appeal  July  17, declaring  his  people  will  fight  on  even  if  their  cities  are  destroyed.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV, NO. 25JULY  25,  1966
'»'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16   CENTS
On  the  Question  of War  Crimes  in Vietnam
Nothing   could   be   more   barbaric  than   the   reactions   in
Washington   to  the  possibility  that  U.S.  aviators'may  be  put
on  trial  as  war  criminals  in  Hanoi.    It  will  not  add  to  our
country's  reputation  when   Senators  as  senior  as  Russell   of
Georgia  threaten  to  "make  a  desert"  of  North  Vietnam,  and
Senators  as  liberal  as  Aiken  of  Vermont  speak  of  its   "com-
plete   destruction."     A  nation  that   napalms  villages  in   the
South  on  the  mere  suspicion  that  they  may harbor  rebels  and
bombs  the  North  without  a  declaration  of  war  is  hardly  a
model  of  adherence  to  international  law.    Something  of  the
terror  that  Washington   officialdom  feels  for  Lyndon  Johnson
is  unwittingly reflected  in  the  appeals  pouring  out  of  the  capi-
tal  to  Hanoi  not  to  provoke  him—we  almost  typed  it  Him—
by  trying  the  fliers.
Neo-Nazis  Lecture  Us  On Ethics
When  Senatorial  "doves"   (including   some  whose   cooing
has  hitherto  been  barely  audible)  made  their  joint  appeal  in
the  Senate  July  15  against  trial  of  the  fliers,  Teddy  Kennedy
said  Hanoi's  plans  showed  an  "absence  of  consideration   for
the   innocent."     Consideration   for   the   innocent   has  hardly
been  a  feature  of  our  bombing  policy.    Our  ethics  are  in dis-
array and  we are being  lectured on  them  from  strange quarters.
The   favorite   organ   of   Germany's  unrepentant   Nazis,   Die
National  Zeitung,  complained   (Jan.   14)   that  while  alleged
German  war  criminals were  still being  persecuted  "with  a zeal
worthy  of   a  better   cause"   frightful   war  crimes  were  daily
being  committed  with  impunity  on  both   sides  in  Vietnam.
It   illustrated  this  with   an   Associated  Press  photo   of   U.S.
soldiers  looking  on  while  a  South  Vietnamese  beat  a  fallen
Viet  Cong  prisoner  with  rifle  butt  and  boot.    The  mistreat-
ment  and  torture  of  Viet  Cong  prisoners  by South  Vietnamese,
and  sometimes by our  own  men, has  been  an  open  scandal  and
a  clear  violation  of  that  1949  Geneva  convention  on  the  treat-
ment  of  prisoners  of  war  to  which  we  are  now   appealing.
Die  National  Zeitung  did  not  mention  that  a  principal  pur-
pose  of  the   1949   treaty  was  to  prevent  a  repetition   of   the
barbarity   with   which   the   Nazis   treated   Partisans  and   Re-
sistance  fighters  in  Europe,  that  it  was  written   to  extend  to
guerrillas  protection  hitherto  accorded  only  to  regular  troops,
and  that  we  have  sought  to  evade  our  obligations  as  a  signa-
tory  by. handing  over  the  VC  until  quite  recently  to  the  South
Vietnamese,  though  the  treaty  imposes  a  continuous  responsi-
bility  on  the  capturing  power  to  see  that  prisoners  are  not
mistreated.
Voice  of  Reason In  A  Growing Storm
"Comparisons   are  always  shaky   for   situations  are
never  quite identical, but  it  is  an  established  fact  that
the   Algerian  problem   came  nearer  to   a   settlement
when   the   French  ceased   to   look   for   its   solution   in
Cairo   (by   bombing  Port  Said  or  invading  the   Suez
Canal  Zone)  or  in  Tunis  (by  strafing  its  border  towns)
and  began  to  consider  it  as  the  specifically  Algerian
problem  it  was,  no  matter  what  its  overtones  of  out-
side  support  were.  .  .  .  Even  a  total  crushing  of  the
Viet  Cong  and the  wholesale destruction of  North Viet-
nam  are  not  very  likely  to  change the  basic vulnerabili-
ties  of  South  Vietnamese  society."
—From  the  epilogue  to  Viet-Nam  Witness  by  Bern-
ard  B.  Fall,  a  collection  of  his  best  articles  on  that
tortured  country  since 1953.
1   0
The   VC  have  treated   our  men  far   better  than  we  have
treated   theirs.     Malcolm  W.   Browne,  who  won  a  Pulitzer
Prize   for   his   coverage   of   the   Vietnamese  war,  wrote   an
article  on  the  subject  in  True  Magazine  for  July.    He  said
"there  have   been   few  reports  of  VC  torture   of   American
prisoners."     He   reported   little   attempt   at   "brainwashing".
He  described  "Camp  Happiness",  the  model  POW  camp  set
up  at  Fort   Benning,  Georgia,  where  GIs  are  "put    through
indoctrination  sessions,  manhandled  and  even  mildly  tortured
to  give  them  a taste  of  what  it  will  be  like  to  fall  into  enemy
hands."    He  adds,  "Ironically  'Camp  Happiness'  has  proved
largely  a  mirage.    Real  captivity  with  the  Viet  Cong  has  been
quite  different ...  the  Viet  Cong  have  managed  to  make  a
favorable  impression  on  almost  all  of   its  prisoners—an  im-
pression  that  worries  U.S.  officials."
At  a  hearing  before  the  Senate  subcommittee  on  refugees
July  14,  both  the  chairman,  Teddy  Kennedy,  and  Javits  of
New  York,  questioned  Secretary  Rusk  about  the  treatment  of
VC  prisoners.    The  Secretary  said  South  Vietnam  had  taken
"a  basic  policy  decision  .  .  . during the past  year"  to  abide by
the  Geneva  agreement.   "We  have an  interest in  it,"  the  Secre-
tary   added,   "because  we  expect   reciprocity  from  the   other
side."   It  was  only  with  the  increase  in  the  number  of   U.S.
prisoners  held  by  the  other  side  that  we  began  to  obey  the
Convention.    The  change  is  more  recent  than  the   Secretary
implied.    "Just  two  weeks  ago,"   Richard  Dudman  reported
in   the  St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch  July  16,  "it   became   known
that  U.S.  officials  in  Saigon  had  taken  new  steps  to  assure  fair
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  S5,1966
The  Real  Agitators   Are  to  Be  Found  in  The  Loftiest  Places  of  Society
From  Chicago   to  South  West  Africa,  the  Negro  Gets   Lessons  in  Violence
Terrible  lessons  in  violence  are  being  taught  the  Negro  at
home  and  abroad.    An  example  at  home  is  Chicago.     After
the  National  Guard  put  down  Negro  rioting  there,  ten  porta-
ble swimming pools,  costing  $1,000  each,  were rushed  into  the
ghetto  where  the  trouble  started  when  a  policeman  turned off
a  hydrant  being  used  by  Negro  children  to  cool  off.    Since
the  rioting,  Mayor  Daley  has  promised  Martin  Luther   King
to  equip  hydrants  with  spray  nozzles  for  street  showers.     The
Negro  must  feel  that  only  riots  get  results.
Racial  Chain  Reaction
As  we  go  to  press,   new  Negro  riots  are  reported   from
Cleveland,  Jacksonville  and  New  York   City.    Unfortunately
only  a  chain  reaction  of  such  racial  troubles  is  likely  to  impel
Congress   and  the  country  to  deal  on  an "adequate  scale  with
the  twin  problems  of  the  urban  slum  and  racism.   Only  major
convulsions  can  change  the   easy  habits  of   white   supremacy
and  impel  us  to  spend  on  the  slums  the  huge  sums  we  are
accustomed  to  muster  only  for  war.
Vice  President   Humphrey   told  a  conference  in  New   Or-
leans  he  would  "lead  a  mighty  good  revolt  himself"  if  he  had
to  live  in  a  ghetto  where  rats  nibbled  at  his  children's   toes.
Must  we  wait  for  the  revolt  before  acting?    How  can  Hum-
phrey,  so  characteristically sympathetic,  still  support   the  war
in  Vietnam  which  drains  off  the  energy,  the  funds  and   the
social   idealism   necessary  to   prevent   a   catastrophe?      The
situation   will   tend   to   become   more   inflammatory  as   more
Negroes   begin  to  realize  their  disproportionate   share  in  this
war.    A  study by  Charles  C.  Moskos,  Jr.,  of  the  University  of
Michigan,   which  has  just  been   published  by  the  Center   for
Organization  Studies  at  the  University  of  Chicago,  shows  that
because  of  his  lower  educational  attainments the  Negro  gets
shunted  off  in  the  armed  forces,  as  in  civilian  life,  into  the
ranks  of  the  unskilled—the  combat  troops.    The  study  shows
that  the  percentage  of  Negroes  in  combat  arms  has  risen  from
12.1%  in  1945  to  33.4%  in  1962.
The  Negro  is enlisted abroad  in  a war  of  unlimited  violence
but  asked  to  be  non-violent at  home.    Yet  he  is  made  to  feel
Dept. of  Planned  Prevarication
"With  ample  inventory  stocks  still  on  hand,  our  pro-
duction  of  ammunition and  air  ordnance  this  month  will
exceed  our  consumption  this  month.    Indeed,  says  Sec-
retary   McNamara,  I  believe     that  it  may  well   prove
desirable  to   reduce   planned   rates   of   production   sub-
stantially  .  .  .  with  maximum  economy  for  our  taxpay-
ers  .  .  .  [and  to]  avoid  the  carryover  that  was  repre-
sented  by  $12  billion  of  surplus  and  worthless   material
with  which  [sic]   concluded  the  Korean  war."
—LBJ  exuding  optimism,  July  5 press  conference
'The   situation    [the   war   squeeze   on   industry]    is
likely   to   get   worse,   even   though  Defense   Chief  Mc-
Namara  has  just   announced  he  is  trimming  plans  for
production   of  bombs,  rockets  and  other  air  ordnance,
effective   in  90  days.     For   this   cutback   is   largely   a
paper  one;  actual  production   of  these  items  will  con-
tinue  to  rise  sharply  and  by  December  the  rate  of  out-
put  will  be  twice  that  of  June.  .  .  .  Another  hint  of  ris-
ing  defense   needs:  The  steel  'set-aside*  for  the   fourth
quarter,    requiring    producers   to    have    a   stipulated
amount  for  defense  orders,  is  up  30%   from  the  third
quarter."                       —Wall  Street  Journal,  July  13.
that  unless  he  becomes  violent,  very  little  is  done  to  meet  his
grievances.    It  is  not  Stokeley  Carmichael,  it  is  Mayor  Daley
and  President  Johnson  who  by  their  actions  indoctrinate  the
Negro  in  violence.    Violence,  too,  is  the  terrible  lesson  taught
in  Africa  by  white  leadership.    After  almost  six  years  of  de-
liberation,   and  by  the  device  of  giving  the  representative  of
lily-white  Australia  a  double  vote,  the  World  Court  has  dis-
missed  the  South  West  Africa  case  on  a  technicality,  without
reaching  the  merits.    We  may  be  proud   that  the  American
judge,  Philip  C.  Jessup,  dissented  and  voted  in  favor  of  the
appeal  brought  by  Liberia  and  Ethiopia.    But  that  flicker  of
pride  will  not  change  the  outcome.    Black  Africa's  last  hope
of  achieving  justice  by  law  and  in  peace  has  been  destroyed.
The   storm   clouds   of   race  war   are  gathering   at  home   and
abroad.    May  we  yet  find  the  wisdom  and  the  statesmanship
somehow  to  avoid  it!
How  to  Sabotage A  Peace  Mission  and  Use  It  As  An  Excuse  to  Widen  A  War
'On  July  8  the  Washington  Post  published  a  story  by  its
diplomatic   correspondent,   Chalmers   Roberts,   quoting   un-
named   "high  Administration  officials"  as  saying   that  "  a
key   element"  in   Johnson's   decision   to   bomb   the   Hanoi-
Haiphong  oil  installations  was  a  conversation  in  Hanoi  be-
tween  Ho  Chi  Minh  and  "a  foreign  diplomat."   Ho  is  sup-
posed  to  have  said  that  while  North  Vietnam  was  prepared
to  fight  a  long  war  it  did not  expect  that  would  be  necessary
because  the  November  elections   would  "shatter"  Johnson's
political  base.     "Officials  will  not  disclose  the  source  of  the
story,"  Roberts wrote pointedly, "but it  may  have been Cana-
da's Chester  Konning  who was  in  Hanoi  from  June  15 to  18."
It  can  be  stated   on  indisputable  authority  that   Chester
Ronning  neither  saw   Ho  Chi  Minh  nor  brought  back  any
such  message.    On  the  contrary  he  was  told  by  North  Viet-
namese  that  they  were  counting on  their  own  efforts,  not  on
peace  sentiment   in  the  U.S.
Ottawa  and  Washington  have  all  along  taken  very  dif-
ferent   views  of   the   Ronning  mission.     On  June  22   Paul
Martin,   the   Canadian   External   Affairs  Minister,  told   the  '
Canadian  House   of   Commons   Ronning  had  been   "well  re-
ceived",  that  the  details   could  not  prudently  be  disclosed,
that  it  was  too  early  to  assess  the  results  and  that  Canada
would  persist  "in  the  process  of  patient  exploration."    The
same  day  the  State  Department  dismissed  the  Ronning  mis-
sion  as  unproductive.    Yet  David  Kraslow  of  the  Los  An-
geles  Times  reported  from  Ottawa  June  26  that  high  Wash-
ington  officials  in  the  Canadian  capital  agreed  that  Ronning
had   opened   "a  unique  and  useful"   channel   to   Hanoi   and
said  "We want  him  to  keep  trying,  to  keep  talking."   Never-
theless,  three  days  later,  Hanoi  and Haiphong  were  bombed.
When  news  of  the  bombings  reached  Ottawa, Prime Min-
ister  Pearson   voiced  his  regret  in  the  House  of  Commons
and  said  it  had  always  been  Canada's  position  that  a  let-up
in  the  bombings  was  a  condition for  progress  toward  peace
talks.   The story  planted  through  Roberts  July 8 is  regarded
in  Canada  as  an  effort   to  poison   Ronning's  relations  with
Hanoi  and  torpedo  any  new   mission.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  25,1966
Why   LBJ   Opposes   Fuller   Supervision   of   Cloak-and-Dagger   Operations
The  Broader  Issues  Hidden  Behind  the  Controversy  Over  CIA
Johnson  has  twice thrown  his  influence  against  any  attempt
to  place  the  CIA  under  adequate  Congressional  surveillance.
The  first  occasion  was  in  1956,  when  he  was  Majority  Leader
of  the  Senate.   Mansfield  with  34  co-sponsors  put  in  a bill  for
a  Joint  Committee  on  Intelligence.    John  F.  Kennedy  voted
for  it  but  Johnson  turned  on  so  much  pressure  against  it  that
ten   co-sponsors   switched,  and   the  bill  was  finally  defeated
27-59.    Last  week  the  vote  was  on  a  more  moderate  measure
by  Fulbright  to  add  three  members  of  Senate  Foreign  Rela-
tions  to  the  6-member  joint  sub-committee  of  Armed  Services
and  Appropriations  which  at  present  oversees  CIA  operations.
The  White  House  threw  its  full  weight  against  the   proposal.
It  was defeated  6l-to-28,  with  four  other  Senators  paired  or  in
favor.*
Keeping  The  Lid  On
Johnson   had   both   immediate  and   long-range  motives   for
his  opposition.  The  White  House  could  hardly  have  relished
the  idea  that  Fulbright   and  his  colleagues   might   have   used
such  a  joint  committee  to  probe  more  deeply  into  the  faulty
intelligence  which  led  to  the  Dominican  intervention.   There
'have  been   investigations  of   two  previous  failures  of  intelli-
gence.    One  in  1951  looked  into  the  CIA's  failure  to  predict
the   Communist   Chinese   intervention   in  Korea;   the   second,
ten  years  later,  was  assigned  to  study  the  Bay  of  Pigs.    But
both   were   made   by  special   commissions  appointed   by   the
White  House  and  their  findings  were  kept  secret.    It   would
only  take  one  or  two  independent-minded  Senators  on  a  joint
committee  to  blow  the  lid  wide-open  on  similar fiascoes in  the
future.
Sober  Reminder From  Saigon
"U.S.  ground operations in  the  south  have  yet  to  pro-
duce  spectacular victories.   They have neither destroyed
large  communist  'main  force'  units  nor  recaptured  and
held  large  areas  controlled  by  the  Viet  Cong."
—Jack  Steele  from  Saigon  Wash.  Daily  News July  18
* The   Democrats  were   Burdick   (N.D.),   Church   (Idaho),
Fulbright  (Ark),  Gore  (Tenn),   Hart  (Mich),  Hartke  (Ind),
Kennedy   (Mass),   Kennedy   (NY),   McCarthy   (Minn),  Mc-
Govern  (S.D.),  Metcalf   (Mont),  Mondale  (Minn),  Monroney
(Okla),   Morse  (Ore),   Moss   (Utah),   Muskie   (Maine),  Pell
(R.I.),  Proxmire  (Wis),  Williams (N.J.),  Yarborough  (Tex),
Young   (Ohio).    The  Republicans   were  Aiken  (Vt),   Boggs
(Del),   Case   (N.J.),   Fong   (Hawaii),  Griffin   (Mich),  Javits
(NY)   and  Williams  (Del).     Paired  for   the   measure  were
Nelson   (Wis)   and  Mansfield  (Mont)  and  announced  for  it,
Clark  (Pa),   and  Gruening  (Alaska)   all  four  Democrats.
Longer   range  motives  are  as  easily  discernible.    The   CIA
tends  to  be  regarded   as  a  personified  monster,  when  it  only
implements  broader  national  policy.    The  CIA  and  the   Tru-
man  Doctrine  were  born  as  twins  in  1947.    The  Doctrine  an-
nounced   our  intention  to  play  the  role  of  world   gendarme.
As  Truman  worded  it,  the  purpose  was  "to  support  free  peo-
ples  who  are  resisting  subjugation  by  armed  minorities or  by
outside  pressures."    The  CIA  in  its  cloak-and-dagger  activities
was  to  become  the  undercover  instrument of  this  Pax  Ameri-
cana.    The  real  meaning  of  this  announced  purpose   "to  sup-
port  free  peoples"  may  be  inferred   from  the   fact  that   the
CIA,   as   in   Guatemala   and   Iran,  has   overthrown   popular
regimes  unfavorable  to  U.S.  business interests.
It   is  on  this  basic  policy  rather  than  its  instrument  that
attention  ought  to  be  focussed.    Yet  we  find  a  Senator   like
Gore   of   Tennessee,   who   voted   for   the   Fulbright  proposal,
praising  the  CIA  in  his  July  18  letter  to  his  constituents  for
its   "very   successful   operation   in  Guatemala  and   in   Iran."
How  can  Gore,  a  Populist   in  spirit,  who  criticizes big  busi-
ness  at  home,   be  so  blind  to  its  operations  abroad?
No   special  access  to  secrets  is  required  to  understand   the
shortcomings  of  the  CIA.    It  is   heavily  weighted  by  its  pur-
poses  toward  the  Right.    It  provides  secret  troops  with  which
to  protect   U.S.   interests  abroad  against  popular  aspirations
it  is not  equipped  to  understand.   It  is  an  instrument of  inter-
ventionism,   and   Johnson   is  by  nature  an   interventionist,  a
practitioner  of  what  was  known  before  the  advent  of   Com-
munism  as  "dollar  diplomacy",  and  Big  Stick  foreign  policy.
If  Communism  were  blasted  off  the  face  of  the  earth  tomor-
row,  the  CIA  would  go  on  operating.    These   larger  issues
may  easily  be  forgotten  by  mechanical and  melodramatic fixa-
tion  on  the  CIA   as  if  it  were  an  independent  phenomenon.
What's  The  Good  of  Congressional  Watchdog Committees If  Watchdogs Have No  Teeth?
MR.  EDWARDS (D.,  Calif.):  "Mr. Speaker,  I  would  like
to  comment  on  two  stories  which  appeared in  our morning
newspapers.    I  refer  to  the  statement  by  the  Solicitor Gen-
eral  that  the  Director  of  the  FBI,  Mr.  Edgar  Hoover,  was
responsible  for  the  illegal  bugging  of  a  hotel  room  in  the
city  of  Washington,  and  the  release  by  the  State  Depart-
ment  of  an  attempt  by  two  Czechoslovak  diplomats  to  plant
a  listening  device  in the  State  Department.   Now it  may be,
Mr.  Speaker,  that   the  appearance of  these  two  stories  at
the  same  time  is   totally   coincidental.    But  I   think   it   is
more  than  passing   strange  that  the  two  releases  were  so
neatly  timed.   Indeed,  I  wonder  whether  the  spy  story would
have  appeared  at  this  time  if  it  had  not  been  for  the image-
damaging  aspects  of  the  statement  by  the  Solicitor  General.
It  is  common  knowledge that  Mr. Hoover  is  a  master of  the
art  of  public  relations.   This is  a  valuable  asset  to  any pub-
lic  figure.    But  I  most  seriously  question  the  release  of  in-
formation,  of  potential  consequence to  our  own  intelligence
and  security  operations  for  the  purpose  of  "blanketing"  a
negative  story  about  Mr.  Hoover."
—In  the  House  of  Representatives,  July  14.
This  statement   is  of  unusual   interest  for   two  reasons.
One  is  that  the  speaker,  Don  Edwards,  head  of  the   Ax>A,
is  also  a  former  FBI  man.    The  other  is  that  the  FBI,  un-
like  the  CIA,  is  subject  to  annual  scrutiny  of  its  budget
by  Congress.    The  FBI  Chief,  with  his  principal  assistants,
is  questioned  each  year  by  the  Appropriations Committees
and  the  transcript   released  to  the  public.    Yet  these  com-
mittees   have  never   used   their   power   to   investigate   the
illegal  use  of  wiretapping or  other  bugging  devices  by   tho.
FBI.    This  is  a  reminder  in  the  midst  of  the   CIA  debate
that   Congressional  surveillance is  no  better  than  the  men
who  do  the   job.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  25,1966
To  Destroy  North  Vietnam's  Dams  Would  Be  Genocidal
(Continued  from  Page   One)
treatment   of  captured  enemy  soldiers."     He   said  they  were
being  held  in  our  custody until  they  could  be  delivered  to  new
model  South  Vietnamese.camps  and  that  U.S.  MP's  would  be
stationed   in   the   compounds   "as   an   additional    safeguard"
against   their  mistreatment.
Nuremberg  Still  A  Precedent
But  the  Geneva  Convention,  to  which  we  are  belatedly  con-
forming,  does  not  bar  the  trial  of  prisoners  as  war  criminals.
Senator  Morse,   after  putting  the  text  of  the  Convention   into
the  Congressional  Record  July  18,  told  the  Senate,  "There  is
no  language  in  the  convention,  in  my  judgment,  that   would
justify   any  plan  on  the  part  of  North  Vietnam  to  try  these
American  prisoners."     The  Geneva  Convention   does  not  re-
peal  Nuremberg.     Article  99  permits  the  trial  of   prisoners
of   war   for   acts  forbidden   by  international  law.     The   Gen-
eral  Assembly  of  the  United  Nations  unanimously  approved
the  principles  established   by  the  Nuremberg   trials.     Article
85   of   the   Geneva   Convention   recognizes   the   right   to   try
prisoners  for   offenses   committed   before  their  capture,   speci-
fying  only  that  even  if  convicted  they  shall  retain  the  benefits
of   the  Convention.    These  privileges  range  from  the  right
to  receive  mail  to  a  right  not  to  be  employed  in  war  plants.
But  North  Vietnam, when  it  signed  the  Convention   in   1957,
joined   the   other   Soviet  powers   in  appending   a   reservation
denying  these  privileges  to  persons  convicted  "in  accordance
with  the  principles  of  the  Nuremberg  trial,  of  war  crimes  or
crimes  against  humanity."
Under   the  Geneva   convention,   accused  prisoners  are  pro-
tected  by  certain  safeguards  designed  to  provide  a  fair  trial.
North  Vietnam  cannot  properly  deny  them  on  the  plea  that
this  is  an  undeclared  war  since  the  Convention  by  its  terms
applies  to  any  armed  conflict.     Under   the  principles   estab-
lished   at  Nuremberg,   the   plea  that  one  was  acting  on   the
orders   of   a   superior   is  not   a   defense   but   may  be   offered
in  mitigation  of  penalty.    The   North  Vietnamese   may  put
some   fliers  on  trial,  perhaps  the  one  or  two  ready  to  make
some  kind  of  confession,  and   then  hand   out  moderate  sen-
tences.    But  they  could  use  the  verdict  to  condemn  those  who
gave  the  orders.   President  Johnson  and  Secretary  McNamara
On   Vacation   in
Ky  Picked  One Wise  Adviser  Anyway
Ky  named an  80-person  advisory council  today  to  act
as  a  sounding  body  on high  policy.  .  .  .  AH recent  Viet-
namese   governments  have  had  advisory  bodies,  with
varying  degrees  of  influence.    None  have  had  any  real
power.    One,  which  existed   in   the  fall   of   1964,   was
called  the  High  National  Council.    When  its  members
tried  to  engage  actively  in  governmental  affairs,   half
its  members  were  arrested  in  their  homes  and  sent  off
to  a  remote  military  camp.  .  .  .  The  duties  of  the  new
advisers  have  never  been  specified.    "I  think  we  will
present  our  ideas  on  economics,  social  and  cultural  af-
fairs,"  said  one  member.   "And  politics,"  said  another.
"No,  not   politics,"  said  a  third.    "I  don't   think  that
would  be  wise."
—Jack  Foisie  from  Saigon  in Washington  Post, July  6
might   well   find   themselves   condemned   in   absentia   as  war
criminals.     Article   10   of   the   Allied   Control    Council   law
applied   at  Nuremberg   makes   "wanton   destruction   of   cities,
towns   or   villages"   a  war   crime.     Those   who   bombed   oil
depots  with   minumum  damage  to  civilians  could   put  up  a
defense,  but  those who  smashed  North  Vietnam's  third  largest
city,  Nam  Dinh,  would  have  a  poor   case.
Hanoi's  threats  of  trial  may  be  designed  to  give  our  leaders
pause  as  they  plan   further   escalation.     Hanoi   fears   deaths
by  flood  and  famine  if  we  smash  the  dams  which  protect  the
populous  rice  fields  of  its  Red  River  valley.    Destruction  of
dikes  was  one  of  the   crimes  for   which   Seyss-Inquart,  head
of  the Na2i  occupation  in  Holland,  was sentenced  to be hanged
at  Nuremberg.     We  want  to  call   attention   to  an   interview
given  Australian  papers   by  our  Ambassador,  Edward   Clark,
a  close  friend  of  Johnson's,  after  he  returned  from  a  visit  to
the  White  House  with  the  Australian  Prime  Minister.     "We
will  get  better   attention   by  putting   the  pressure   on  them,"
Ambassador   Clark   said   (Sydney   Morning   Herald,   July   9).
"There will  be more  to  come.    We  will  knock  out  oil  dumps,
electric  grids,  power  lines,  dams  and  canals."   The  fliers  who
bomb   these   dams   and   the   men   who   order   that   genocidal
step-up  in  devastation  will  be  guilty of  crimes  against  human-
ity.     The  rest  of  the  world  will  condemn  them  and  us,  what-
ever  Hanoi  may  do.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
August—Next   Issue   Dated    Labor   Day—Many   Thanks   to
IF.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Aye.,  N.  W.
Noon,  July   20
Our   Good   Readers
Please   renew   (or  enter)
Name  ...................................
5618    Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
a  sob  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Street    ....................................................................
City   ..........................................   Zip..........State..
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..........................................................
Street   ......'..............................................................
7/25/66
City   ..........................................     Zip..........State......................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   PUtie*
Indicate  if  announcement   wished  O
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December  and   Ihe
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by   I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;     $6   in   Canada:    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Hail   rates:
$15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED