I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966nov07.pdf

============================================================

The  Trickery  in  Our  Viet  Withdrawal   Offer,   P.  3
De  Gaulle's  Noble  Indignation  and  the  State  Dept.'s  Effort  at  An  Icy Retort
"We   find   it   totally   detestable   that   a   small   country     ground  that  a  military   victory   there  is   impossible.    The
should  be  bombed  by  a  very  big  one."                                        General,  U.S. officials  noted,  is  a  professional  military  man
—Gen. de  Gaulle  at  his  press  conference,  Oct. 28.         and  apparently  thinks about  victory  only  in  military terms,
"State  Dept.  reacted  icily  yesterday  to  de  Gaulle's  ad-
     which
  w  "°t  »»  avowed  objective of  the  U.S."
vice  to  withdraw   American  troops   from   Vietnam   on  the                        —Associated  Press in  Washington Post,  Oct. 29.
I. R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  35November  7, 1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  China  Builds  Bombs  At  the  Expense  of Bread
Those  whom  the  gods  would  destroy  they  first  render  com-
placent.    China's  giant  strides  to  nuclear  power  represent  the
most   important   political   and   military  development   of   our
time.    But  both  the  great  capitals  challenged   are  doing  their
best  to  pretend  nothing  has  happened.     Pravda,  in  the  prize
journalistic  underplay  of  the  century,  gave  16  words  at  the
bottom   of  page  5  to  the  news  that   China  had  successfully
tested  a guided  missile  with  a  nuclear  warhead.    In  Washing-
ton  the  Daily  News   hit  the  streets  with  a  banner   headline
which  should  be  preserved  for  the  wry  amusement  of  poster-
ity.     It  said,  "Red China's  Missile  Test  Doesn't  Scarce  Penta-
gon."     If  we  had  been  editing  that  paper  we would  have  put
a  second  line  under  it,  "But Pentagon's  Smugness  Scares Us."
Rusk's  Crystal  Ball  Cracks  Up  Again
Secretary  Rusk,  seven  days  after  the  first  Chinese  nuclear
explosion   in  1964,  assured  the  country  that  it  would  be  "a
very  considerable   number   of   years  before  there   is  anything
there"  i.e. in  China  "that  would  impose  any serious problem."
This  remark  should  rank  with his  assertion  in  1950 that  Com-
munist  China  was  only  a  "Slavic  Manchukuo",  i.e. a  Russian
puppet   state.    In  their  fourth  nuclear  test  in  two  years,  the
Chinese  have  shown  that  they  could  (1)  build  an  operational
intermediate  ballistic  missile,   (2)    perform  the   difficult   feat
of  miniaturizing  a  nuclear  warhead  for  it  and  (3)  perfect  the
safety  factor  to  the  point  where  they  could  detonate  it  over
their  own  territory.   These  were  no  small  achievements.   They
were  enough   to  make  Le  Figaro  (Oct.  28)   say  that  China
had  overtaken  both  England  and  France  in  the  field  of  nu-
clear  missiles  (neither  has  yet  tested  a  missile  with  live  nu-
clear warhead)  and  must now be regarded  as the No.  3 nuclear
power.
Chinese  nuclear  capacity has  been  even  more  underestimated
than  was  the  Soviet  Union's.  In  a  Senate  speech  Oct. 18, just
before  the  latest  Chinese  blast,  Senator  Jackson   (D.   Wash.)
expressed  surprise  at  "the weapons  sophistication   displayed"
in  the  first  three  Chinese  tests.   The  surprise  in  the  first  was
the  use  of  enriched  uranium-235  instead  of  plutonium, which
meant  that  the  Chinese  could  build  up  a  stockpile  faster  than
expected.    The  surprise  in  the  third,  last  May,  was  the  use of
"thermonuclear   materials",  which   indicated   that   they  could
build  H-bombs  of  an  advanced type.  The  new feat, requiring a
high  degree  of  engineering comptence,  was accomplished  faster
than  Secretary  McNamara  expected  in  the  predictions  he  made
Songs  The  Pentagon  Never  Taught  Them
His   [the city  based  staff   adviser]   intelligence  is   six
months  old, his  native  wit  is nil,
For   him   the   trees   teem   with   VC's and   regiments
crowd  each hill,
He  has  no kinfolk  in  the  woods,  there's  naught  for  him
to lose,
So  if  in  doubt  hell  always  shout,  "Send  in  B-52s!"
The   FAC   [Forward   Air   Controller]   rides   forth   to
battle,  a  warrior  without  match
In  his  monogrammed  flak jacket  and  his  F-100  patch,
Put  napalm  on  a hamlet and burnt  the  whole thing  flat,
Got   a  thousand  noncombatants  and  he's  sorry  about
that.
The  JG's  [a   Lt.   Jr.   grade   acting   as   naval  gunfire
spotter]  daily  recon  is  the  terror  of  the  beach
As  he  calls  for  naval  gunfire  on  everything  in  reach,
He  sees  supplies  in every hootch  [hut],  the  foe  in every
boat.
He's  killed  100  fisherman,  12  chickens and  a  goat.
—From  ballads  the  GI's  sing in  Vietnam,  as  reported
in  the  New  York  Times  Sunday  Magazine,  Oct.  SO.
i    3
last   December   to  the  NATO   Council.    His   forecast   of  a
Chinese  ICBM  by  1975  may  be  an  underestimate.     "Consider-
ing  the  progress  made  in  developing  a  nuclear  missile  system
with  an  operational  warhead,"   the  famous  nuclear  physicist
Ralph  Lapp  told  the  Weekly,  "it  would  not  be  surprising  if
the  Chinese  could  test  an  ICBM  in  two  years."    Senator  Jack-
son,  who  is  chairman  of  an  atomic  military  applications sub-
committee,  believes  China  might  put  nuclear  missiles  on  those
of  its  submarines  which  are  outfitted  with  tubes  for   surface
launching  of   missiles.    This   would   be  enough   to   threaten
our  coastal  ports.    The  Chinese  may be  able  to  deter  us  from
an  atomic attack  on  them  earlier  than  we  expected.    The  mere
prospect  will  change  the  politics  of  Asia  and  the  world.
The  Chinese  announcement  of  their  nuclear  missile  test  is
too  quickly  being   dismissed  as  propaganda.     Much   can  be
learned  by  a  thoughtful  reading.   When  they  say  that  "at  no
time  and  in  no  circumstances  will  China  be  the  first  to  use
nuclear  weapons,"   this  is  no  more  than  a  recognition   of  our
nuclear  superiority.    All  they  can  hope  to  do  for  many years
to  come  is  to  have  enough  missiles  to  be  able  to  inflict  unac-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  November  7, 1966
The  Pentagon  Prepares  The  Way  For  A  New  Military  Dictatorship  In  Santo  Domingo
We're  Starting  to  Help  Balaguer  The  Way  We  Helped  Diem
What  little  news  filters  through   indicates  that  basic  liber-
ties  are  disappearing  and  trouble  brewing  again  in  the  Do-
minican  Republic.    Two  opposition  Senators  complained   Oct.
19  that  two  radio  programs,  one  by  the   14  June  Movement,
the  other  by  La  Romana  Sugar  Mill  United  Union,  had  been
suspended    in   their   provinces   in   violation   of   constitutional
rights.     The  radio  stations   which  broadcast   these   programs
were  shut  down  to  make  them  drop  both  programs.    A  simi-
lar  and  more  serious  incident occurred  Oct.  25  when  a  leader
of  -Juan  Bosch's  PRD   was  cut  off  the  air  after  he  criticized
the  government  for  giving  land  to  foreign  companies  and  the
U.S.  Embassy  for  interfering  in  domestic   affairs.
Bosch   Leaving  in  Protest
This  was  but  the  latest  in  a  series  of  moves  restricting  the
PRD,   though   it  has  been  acting  as  a  responsible   opposition,
trying  to  lay  the  foundations  of  a  democratic  society.    These
restrictions  plus  a  continued  right-wing terrorism  which  seems
to  have  at  least  the  tacit  sympathy of  police  and  army  have
created  resentment  inside  the  PRD.    A  substantial  section  of
the  youth has  seceded  and  formed  a  democratic socialist  move-
ment.     Bosch  himself  has  broken  silence  to  accuse  the  U.S.
of   "drastic  intervention"  in  Dominican  affairs   and   the  Bal-
aguer  regime  of   repressing  all  political  activity.    Bosch   has
announced  that  he  is  resigning  his  leadership  and  leaving  for
Europe.    The  hope  of  peaceful  change  may go  with  him.
At  this  juncture,  the  Pentagon   is  taking  steps  which  will
make  it  easier  to  impose  a  military  dictatorship  again.     An
AP  dispatch  from  Santo  Domingo  we  saw  in  only  one  paper
(Washington  Post,  Oct.  16)  carried  the  disturbing  news  that
the  U.S.  army  is  assigning  bilingual advisers  to  the  Domini-
can  army  "for  a  training  program   similar  to  the  one   begun
in  Vietnam  in  I960."    Though  the  Inter-American Force  has
.  departed,  a  U.S.  Military  Aid  and  Assistance Group  remains.
The  Dominican Army  will  be  the  only  one  outside Vietnam to
have  U.S.  advisers  assigned  to  it  down  to  the  company  level.
The  commanding officer   of  the  U.S.  mission  was  a  military
adviser  in  Vietnam  in  1961.    This  should  be  enough  to make
Balaguer  nervous.    It  certainly  does  us.
What  the  Manila  Razzle-Dazzle Hid
"Manila—In  an  address  to  the  National  Press  Club
in  Washington  last  month,  President   Marcos   accused
the    previous    Philippine    administration     of    having
'coddled'  the  Hukbalahap  guerrillas   in  Central  Luzon.
.  .  .  Officials  of  the  ousted   Macapagal   administration
replied  that  Marco's  police  constabulary  were  shooting
people  just  on  the  suspicion  that  they  were  Huks  and
that  peasants  had been  'massacred'. . . . When a  sudden
upsurge  of   Huk  activity  towards   the   middle  of  this
year  brought  the  Government  forces  into  punitive  ac-
tion,  some  of  the  blunders  that  marked  the  early  years
of  the Vietnam  war were  repeated.  . . . What  emerges
principally   from    charge    and   counter-charge    is   the
story  of  Government  neglect  that  dates  from  the  death
of  President  Magsaysay  in  1957.   Magsaysay  broke  the
Huks  by  winning  the  confidence of  the  peasants.   Suc-
cessive  governments,  having  seen  the  Huks  eliminated,
did  not  trouble   to  eliminate  the  legitimate  causes  of
peasant   unrest."
—Denis  Warner  in  the  London  Telegraph,  Oct.  29.
The  Dominican  army  is  to  be  provided  with  enough  trucks
"to  move  to  any  trouble  spot  in  the  country"  quickly.     The
AP  said  it  is  hoped  thereby  to  prevent  the  sort  of  breakdown
in  communications  "that  paralyzed  the  Dominican  army  dur-
ing  the  April  rebellion   last  year."     In  short  we  are  out  to
make   sure   that   another   revolt   to   reestablish    constitutional
government  will  be  unsuccessful.    We  can  see  here  the  real
meaning  of  military  aid   in   Latin  America.    It  was  in  just
such  a  training  program   that  the  Trujillo  dictatorship  in  the
Dominican  Republic  originated.    Instead  of  using  our  lever-
age  to   force  Balaguer   to   restore  political  freedom,  we   are
strengthening   the   "gorillas"—the   military.    This   is   Pax
Americana  as  the  Caribbean  and  Central  America  have  known
it  for  two  generations.
To  those  who  still  believe  military  aid  the  best  assurance  of
internal  security we  cite  again  the  case  of  Costa  Rica,  the  only
securely  democratic  regime  in  Central  America.    It  owes  this
to  the  fact  that  it  long  ago-abolished  its  Army  altogether  and
with  it  any  danger  of  help  from  the  U.S.  military.
Will  the  FCC  Sneak  Approval  of  the  ABC-ITT Merger  While  Congress  Is  Out  of Town?
To  permit  ITT  to  acquire  ABC  by  merger  would  be  to
hand  over  one of  the  big  three  TV-radio chains  to  the  mili-
tary-industrial  complex.   International  Telephone  &  Tele-
graph  is  a  major  supplier to  the  military; half  of  its  domes-
tic  income  is  from  the  government.   Eighty  percent  of  its
total  profits  come  from  foreign  operations  in  118  countries;
it  is  notorious  in  the  history  of  our  Latin  American  rela-
tions  as  a  supporter  of  dictatorships  and  a  beneficiary of
big   stick  diplomacy.    To  let   ITT   take   over  ABC  would
hardly   contribute,  as   Senator   Gaylord   Nelson   (D.  Wis.)
suggested  in  a  letter  of  protest  to  the  FCC,  to  "the  public's
interest  in  objective  news  reporting."
A  staff   report   to  the  Federal   Communications  Commis-
sion  said  the  proposed  merger  "eclipses in size and surpasses
in  importance any  other  transfer  of  broadcast  interests  the
Commission  has  yet  been  called  upon to  consider."    Senator
Morse  warns  the  Commission  may  be planning to  speed  ap-
proval  while  Congress  is  out  of  session.   Only  two  days  of
hearings  have  been  held  by  the  FCC;  no  public  spokesmen,
only  the  two  companies, have been  heard.   The  FCC is  said
to  be  lined  up  4-to-3  for  the  merger,  and  FCC  Chairman
Rosel  Hyde has  not  agreed  to  Nelson's  request  that  he  hold
up  action  until Justice  Department has  decided  whether  the
merger  is  in  violation  of  the  Clayton  Act.
Whether  the  merger  is  or  not,  the  FCC  has  broad  power
to  block  it,  for  the  law  requires  that  the  merger  must  be
found  to  serve  "the  public  interest,  convenience and   neces-
sity."   One  critical  member  of  the  FCC,  Nicholas   Johnson,
subjected  one  of  the  witnesses  for  the  merger  to  sharp  in-
terrogation.    He  asked  whether  situations  might  not  arise
when  ABC's  desire  to  do a  public affairs  documentary might
not   clash  with  some  of  ITT's  wide-ranging  interests.    "I
couldn't  imagine  that,"  said  the  witness.    He  was  former
CIA  Chief  John  A.  McCone, named  an  ITT  director  just  be-
fore  the  proposed  merger  was  announced.   He  and  Ike's old
press  secretary,  Jim  Hagerty,  are  its  chief  lobbyists.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  7, 1966
A  Document   Which  Discloses  Trickery  Behind  Our  UN and  Manila  Proposals
Not  Just A Northern Withdrawal But
Congressman  Laird  to  Secretary  McNamara  Sept.  28:
"There  are  a  number  of  points  in  Ambassador  Goldberg's
speech  to  the  United  Nations  Sept.  22  that  I  found  disquiet-
ing  and  I  would   appreciate  your  clarifying  the   Administra-
tion's  position  on  them.     Ambassador  Goldberg   stated  that
the  U.S.  'stands  ready  to  withdraw  its  forces  as  others  with-
draw  theirs  so  peace  can  be  restored  in  South  Vietnam.'    He
later   suggested   'a  time   schedule   for   supervised   withdrawal
from   South  Vietnam  of  all  external  forces—those  of  North
Vietnam  as  well  as  those  from  the  U.S.  and  other  countries
aiding  South  Vietnam.'     Since  this  proposal   specifically  ex-
cludes  the  Viet  Cong,  I  would  like  answers  to  the  following
questions:
"(1)  How  many  troops  fighting  on  the  side  of  the  Saigon
government  and  how  many  fighting  on  the  side  of  the  Com-
munists  would  be withdrawn?
"(2)    How   many  troops   on   each   side  would   remain  in
South  Vietnam after  the  proposed  withdrawal was carried out?
The  Crucial  Question
"(3)  What  is  the  current  estimate  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff   regarding  the  ability  of  the  South  Vietnamese   army  to
cope  with   Viet   Cong   elements  which  apparently  would   be
free  to  continue  the  war?
"(4)    Were  the  views  of  Joint  Chiefs  sought  prior  to  Am-
bassador  Goldberg's  speech  as  to  the  military  implications  of
this  proposal?
"(5)   Were  our  allies  consulted  in  advance  about  this  pro-
posal ?
"I   raise  the   last  question   because  of  the  obvious   concern
of   the   Foreign   Ministers  of   both   Thailand    and   Australia.
Foreign  Minister  Thanat  indicated  the  proposed  Manila  Con-
ference  had  taken  him  by  surprise.    Mr.  Thanat,  at  the  UN
Sept.  27,  pointed  out  that  'many,  if  not  all  the  solutions  ad-
vanced  by one  party or  another  tended  to  favor  the  side  which
instigated  the war  for  placing South Vietnam under  its control.'
"Australia's  Minister  of  External  Affairs,   Frank   Hasluck,
similarly  warned  that  'It  would  be  dangerous  to  peace  in  the
region  and  dangerous  to  world  peace  if  hostilities  ceased  on
unjust  terms  of  in  a  way  that  gave  encouragement  to  further
subversive   infiltration   and   terrorism  in   Southeast   Asia   and
other  parts  of  the  world."
Townsend   Hoopes,   Acting   Assistant   Secretary   of    Defense,
replying   for   McNamara,   Oct.  24:
"Your  questions,  which  relate  to  Ambassador   Goldberg's
proposal   for  'withdrawal  from  South  Vietnam  of  all  external
forces',   apparently  derive  from   a  concern  that   the   proposal
'specifically  excludes'  deactivation  of  the  Viet  Cong.
"While  I  would  agree  that  the  proposal  did  not specifically
address  deactivation  of  the  Viet  Cong,  I  believe  Ambassador
Goldberg  clearly  linked  the  Viet  Cong  with  North  Vietnamese
Army  forces  in  this  excerpt   from   the   same  speech:   'South
Vietnam   is  under   an   attack,   already   several   years   old,   by
forces  directed  and  supplied  from  the  North,  and  reinforced
by  regular  units—currently  some  17  identified  regiments—of
the  North  Vietnamese  Army.'
"To   be  explicit,  let  me  assure  you  that  the  Department  of
10                                                                                                            14
Viet Cong "De-Activation" Demanded
Rusk  and  Goldberg  Misleading
We  publish  here   today   an   exchange  of  letters  be-
tween  Laird  of  Wisconsin,  chairman  of  the  House  Re-
publican   Conference,   and   the   office   of   Secretary   Mc-
Namara.    Fragmentary   newspaper  reports  of  this  ex-
change  have  missed  the  point.    Ambassador   Goldberg
at  the  UN  proposed  that  all  "external"  forces  includ-
ing  our  own  be  withdrawn  from   South  Vietnam.    To
the  Association  of  the  U.S.  Army  in  Washington   Oct.
12,  Secretary  Rusk said:
"Were   are   told   that  an  aggression  is  just  a  'civil
war.'    There  is  an  indigenous  element  in  the  war  in
South  Vietnam   but  relatively   it  is  even  smaller  than
was  the  indigenous  element  in  the  case  of  Greece.    WE
CONSIDER    IT   WELL    WITHIN     THE     CAPACITY
OF  THE  SOUTH   VIETNAMESE     TO  HANDLE.     We
and   others  are  there   because  of  aggression  from   the
North.  .  .  .  And we shall   leave  when   these   invaders
and  arms  from   the  North  go  home."
But  Laird's  release  of  the  reply  from   McNamara's
office,   dated  12  days  after   the  Rusk  speech,   now  dis-
closes  that   Hanoi   would  not  only  have  to  withdraw
Northern   forces  but  "deactivate"  the  indigenous   Viet
Cong  guerrillas  in  the  South,  i.e.  get  them  to  surrender
before  U.S.  troops  would  go  home.
Defense   believes  Ambassador  Goldberg's  speech  includes  the
intent  that  Viet  Cong  military  units  would  be  deactivated  in
any  proposed  withdrawal  of  external  forces  from  North  Viet-
nam.  (Italics  added).    In  response  to  your  specific  questions:
"(1)  and  (2)  The  number  of  troops  on  each  side  to  be
withdrawn  from  or  to  remain  in  South  Vietnam  will  be  major
items  to  be  negotiated   whenever  North  Vietnam  can  be  in-
duced  to  come  to  the  conference  table.    The  numbers  arrived
at  will  be  critically  dependent   on  the  situation  at  the   time
of   negotiations.
(3)   As  previously  indicated,  the  Viet  Cong  would  not  be
free   to  continue  the  war  during  any  phased   withdrawal  of
external   forces.    Hence,   the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff   have   not
addressed  such  a  contingency.
(4)   The  views  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff   invariably  are
considered   at  the   highest   levels   of  our  government   on   all
major  decisions  affecting  the  course  of  the  war  in  Vietnam.
U.S.   policy   on   Vietnam   as   presented   to   the   UN   was   no
exception  to  this  well-established  procedure.
(5)   The  same general  guidelines  applies  equally  to  consid-
eration  of  the  views  of  our  allies.
"You   have  quoted   a   portion   of   Thai   Foreign   Minister
Thanat's remarks at the UN  Sept.  27. He  also stated,  "The Thai
government  and  people  .  .  .  [hiatus  in  original]  would  wel-
come  peace  in  Vietnam  and  in  Southeast  Asia.    Any  proposal
for  an  honorable  and  peaceful  solution  to  the  Vietnam  prob-
lem   from   whatever   quarters   will   therefore   be   assured   of
our  cooperation  and  support.'    Australian Minister  of  External
Affairs  Hasluck  whom  you also  quoted  stated  on  the  same  day,
"This is not  a war that  can be stopped  by surrender,  or  by a  vic-
tory  for  either   side.    It  can  only  be  stopped  by  agreement.
Our   readiness  to  agree  to  cessation  of  fighting  without   any
claim  or  penalty  or  gain  has  been  plainly  declared."    I  hope
this  information  will  be  useful  to  you."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  7,  1966
Neither Washington Nor  Moscow Want to Give Up Their Nuclear  Advantage
(Continued  from  Page  One)
ceptable  damage  on  us  if  we  make  a  nuclear  attack  on  them.
If  they  can  hold  two  major  cities  like  San  Francisco  or  New
York  hostage  in  this  way, that  may  be  enough.    This  is  also
the  logic of  the  French   force  de  frappe.     The  idea  was  born
when   Moscow,   in   the   Suez   crisis,  threatened  London   and
Paris  with  nuclear  missiles.    The  French  would  never  dare
attack  Russia  with  their  inferior  nuclear  force  but  they  be-
lieve  the  threat that  they might  be  able to  "take out"  Moscow,
and  Kiev  would  be  enough  to  deter  Russia  from  making  a
nuclear  attack  on  France.    The  Chinese  are  talking  sober  nu-
clear  strategy  when  they  say  their  weapons  are  "entirely   for
defense."    If  they  can  build  enough  nuclear  strength  to  neu-
tralize  ours,  we  could   only  wage  conventional  war  against
them.    There  they  have  the  advantage  of  their  huge  man-
power  and  their  readiness  to  fall  back on  a guerrilla  "people's
war."    These  are  assets  which  can  be  used  on  the  defensive
only,  but  the  combination  would  make  China  impregnable  to
successful  attack.   This  is the  strategic  meaning of  the  Chinese
missile  and  this  is what makes it  irrelevant  for  President  John-
son  to  warn  the  Chinese  as  he  did  in  Malaysia  Oct. 30  that
any  nuclear  potential  they may acquire will  be  counterbalanced
by  our  superior   power.    The  Chinese  do  not  need  to  match
us  to  deter  us.
The  Opportunity  We  Lost
The  lesson  of  the  Chinese  missile  is  that  to  stop  the pro-
liferation  of  nuclear  weapons  is a political,  not  a  technological
problem.  When  a  nation  as  poor   as  China  can  develop   the
nuclear  missile  so  quickly,  it  should  be  clear  that  they  are  no
longer available  only to  large  rich nations.   To  stop  the  spread
of  nuclear  weapons  requires  some  means  of  guaranteeing  the
smaller powers  security without  them.  Now  is the time to recall
those  occasions  in  the  late  50s  and  60s  when  China  appealed
to  us  in  vain  for  a  nuclear-free Pacific,  and  for  a  pledge  that
nuclear   weapons   would   not   be   used   against  non-nuclear
powers.   That was the  time to  stop  the  Chinese  nuclear  missile.
The  Chinese  demand  then  is  die  same demand  being  made
now  by  some  40  non-nuclear  powers   in  the  current  debate
Running  Short  of  Pilots  in  the  Air  War
Washington,  Oct.  29  (AP)—The  loss  of  at  least  24
war  plane  pilots  in  the  fire  this  week  aboard  the  USS
Oriskany  has  added  (o  the  Navy  shortage  of   aircraft
carrier  attack  pilots.   The  Navy  now is  operating  with
about  2,000  carrier  pilots,  750 short.   Even  before   the
Oriskany  fire  the  Navy  had  estimated  that  at   present
attrition  rates, by early  1968 it  would be necessary to  re-
duce  the  number  of  combat  missions  over  North  Viet-
nam  or  order  fliers  to  serve  beyond  the  present  limit of
two  6-month tours. . . . Many pilots  have  been flying 2
combat  sorties  a  day .  . .  sometimes  for 10 days  in a
row.    Adding  to  the  problem  is  the  heavier  pilot  loss
rate.  .  .  . One officer  said  the amount  of  anti-aircraft
fire  doubled  between  last  Fall  and  this  May.  Since
May,  he  added,  it  has  tripled.
—Baltimore Sun,  Oct. 30.
over  non-proliferation  at  the  UN  General   Assembly.    They
are  unwilling  to  renounce  nuclear  weapons  unless  the  nuclear
powers,   in  the  words  of  the  resolution,   "give  an  assurance
that  they  will  not  use, or  threaten  to  use, nuclear   weapons
against   non-nuclear   weapon   states."     Neither   the   Warsaw
Part  powers  nor  the  NATO  powers  are  supporting   this  reso-
lution.    This  is  why  the  Ambassador  of  India  was  so  bitter
in  his  speech  at  the  UN  Oct. 31.    India  is  not  disposed  to
sign  a  non-proliferation  treaty  unless  the  big  powers  agree  to
stop   expanding  the   vast   nuclear   arsenals   at   their   disposal.
India  wants  nuclear  arms  and  their  delivery  vehicles  reduced
and  then   eliminated.    It  wants  nuclear  renunciation   to  be
mutual,  and  not  for  smaller   powers  only.    Even  if   nuclear
"umbrellas"   are  offered   the  smaller  powers,   it  would   be  at
the  price  of  lost  independence  and  the  risk  of  deals  made
over  their  heads.     It  must  seem  hypocritical  to  the   smaller
powers  for  Johnson  to  say, as  he  did  in  Malaysia,  that  they
would  be  making  bombs  at  the  expense  of  bread.    To  them
this  may  seem  the  price  of   survival  in  the  nuclear  jungle.
Our  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  gives  them  a  taste  of  what
the  defenceless  may  expect.
(Next  Week: Is  The  Anti-Missile  The  Way  Out?)
Well  Be Clad  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —  Send  A  Stamped  Addressed Envelope
Also  PLEASE Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers  Urgent
I. F.  Stone's Weekly       5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
11/7/66
Street    ......................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State..
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ....................................   Zip................  State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Second  Clans  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except   in  August,  the  last  week  in  December  and   the
first  week  in  January   and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  K   in  the  U.S.:  $6  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.    Air   Mall  rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED