I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966may30.pdf

============================================================

IPS—Report  from  Cambodia
Who  Wouldn't  Be  Nervous?
"The  night  before  last  the  President  came  to  Chicago  to         —Chas.  H.  Percy,  G.O.P.  candidate  for  the  U£.  Senate
deride   his   critics   as   'nervous   Nellies/    He's   darn   right      in  Illinois,  against  pro-war  Paul  Douglas, May  19.
we're  nervous.    And  from  every  indication,  we're  going  to          Indeed  we'd  say  that  this  is  one  case  where  anyone  who
become  more  nervous."                                                                 isn't  nervous  ought  to  see  a  psychiatrist.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  19
MAY  30,  1966
»«       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.16  CENTS
Where  Communism  Has  Really  Been  Contained
Peace  lies  like  a  benediction  on  Cambodia.    To  go   from
Saigon  to  Pnom  Penh  is  to  go  from  the  Inferno  of  South-
east  Asia  to  its  Paradise.    Despite  the  war,  the  break-off   in
diplomatic  relations  and  the  constant  border   incidents,  Air
Vietnam  and  Royal  Air  Cambodge  still  fly  on  alternate  days
between  the  two  capitals.    Nowhere  else  in  the  world  could
an  hour's  flight  provide  so  sharp  a  contrast.    To  land  in  the
capital  of  Cambodia  after  eight  days  amid  the  squalor   and
apprehension   of  Saigon  is  fully  to  savor  the  blessings   of  a
neutralist  policy  in  Southeast  Asia.    On  the  one  side  a  dark,
dirty  crowded  airport,  where  travellers  are  subject  to  inter-
minable  delays  while  tired  and  sheepish  GI's  pour  in.    On
the  other  side,  a  white,  clean  and  relaxed  airport,  with  hardly
a  uniform  in  sight  except  for  one  police  control   official.
No  Planes  Overhead
On  the  ride  to  PnAm  Penh,  I  was  struck  by  the  absence  of
check-points   and   barricades,   the   cleanliness   of   the   broad
boulevards  leading  into  Prince  Sihanouk's  capital,  the  modern
apartment  houses  around  the  city,  the  well-kept  kwns.    The
city,  with  its  many  parks  and  wide  streets,   delights  the  eye
after  the  uncollected  refuse  of  Saigon.  At  the  bougainvillea-
covered  Hotel  Royale, with  its  palms  and  its  swimming  pool,
its  wide  halls  and  air-conditioned  rooms,  I  got  a  palatial  bed-
room  at only $8 a night  with—luxury  of  luxuries—a hot  bath.
In  a  cyclopus  from  the  hotel   into  town  for  dinner,   the
night  is  like  velvet.    There  are  no  planes  overhead,  no  mor-
tar   or   howitzer   shells   exploding   on   the   outskirts.     On   a
stroll  after  dinner,  it  looked  as  if  everybody  was  out  on  the
sidewalk  after  the  heat  of  the  day.   The  shops  are  open,  the
movies  do  a  brisk  business  mostly  with  Italian-style  spectacu-
lars  made  in  Hong  Kong.    Children  play  on  the  sidewalks
but  they  don't  beg  as  they  do  in  Saigon.    No  one  clutches
at  your  sleeve  to  sell  his  sister.    There   are  no  importunate
cyclopus  drivers.    The  bars  are  few.    The   huge   open   air
market  in  the  center  of  town  sells  everything  from  flowers  to
comic  books  in  French  and  Khmer.    A  white  visitor  walking
amid  this  short,  slight  people,   darker  than  the  Viets,  feels
no  apprehension.    I  felt  much safer  walking  back  to  the  hotel
through   the  dimly  lit  residential  areas  and  the  dark  parks
than  I  would  have  felt  in  Washington.
In  my three  days  in Cambodia I  was charmed  and  delighted
by  the  successful  mixture  of  the  traditional  and  the  modern
characteristic   of   Prince   Sihanouk's   regime.     At   the   huge
Royal   Palace  compound,  a  miniature   Asian   Versailles,   the
A  Letter  to  LBJ:  Is  This  Restraint?
"Dear   Mr.  President:   We  find  the   following   two
statements  difficult   to  reconcile:
"(1)  Time Magazine  (April  29),  The  Pentagon  plans
to  use  638,000 tons  of  bombs  in  Vietnam  in  1966.'  [The
figure  is   from   McNamara's testimony  to  the  Senate
Foreign   Relations  Committee  in  April—IPS.]    With
127,000  square  miles  and  a  combined population  of  25
million,   this   represents   5   tons   of   bombs  for   every
square  mile  and  1  ton  for  every  40  persons.
"(2)   'We  have  used  our  power  not   willingly   and
recklessly   ever  but  always   reluctantly   and  with  re-
straint,'  Princeton  speech.
"Would  you  consider  it   restraint   if   a  'benefactor'
from   abroad  budgeted  a  similar  ratio  of  bombs  for
every  square  mile  and citizen  of  the  United  States?"
Name  withheld.
Queen   Mother  preserves  the  country's  links  with  its  ancient
monarchy.    In  a  guided   tour   through   its  buildings   of  ex-
quisitely   gilded   wood   and   intricate   yellow-blue   tiles,   the
visitor  sees  the  coronation  sword  which  dates  back  to  the  7th
century,  the  high   coronation   throne  under   the   seven-tiered
sacred   parasol,   the   two-storied   pavillion   from   which   the
monarchs  mounted  the  royal  elephants,   several   12th  century
cannons  and  a  small  fortune  in  the  dynasty's  gems   under
glass.    Everywhere  are  images  of  Naga,  the  7-headed   sacred
serpent  of  Vishnu,  and  of  Buddha  in that  mixture of  Brahman
and   Buddhist   faith   brought   there   three   centuries   ago  by
India's  traders  and  missionaries.    From  a palace  in  one  corner
of  the  grounds,  the  gongs  and  xylophones  of  the  Royal  ballet
school  were  going  full  blast  at  morning  rehearsal,  off  limits,
like  an  Oriental  seraglio,  to  visitors.
Not  more  than  a  mile  away, on  the  banks  of  the  broad  and
leisurely  flowing  Mekong,  there  is  a  sight  of  quite  a  different
sort.    An  exposition  hall  built on  clean  modern  lines  displays
the  results  of  ten  years  development   (1955-65)   under   the
Popular   Socialist  movement  established   by  Prince  Sihanouk.
Graphic  colored  charts  show  no  tractors  in  1955,  and   1030
in   1965.    Here  the  regime  boasts  that  illiteracy  is  now  only
20%  and  that   in  one  year,  thanks  to  a  volunteer   teaching,
campaign  (it  recalls Castro's  Cuba)  there  will  be  none.    Pop-
ular   Socialism   seems  to  have  stimulated  private   enterprise.
The   charts   show   an   impressive  expansion   in   private   and
mixed  enterprises;  the  publicly  owned  sector  is  more   recent
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  30,1966
(Continued   from   Page   One)
and  confined  largely  to  banking  and  the  export-import  busi-
ness,  which  has  more  than   doubled.    The  United  States  is
conspicuously   absent   from   the   countries  shown  as   having
trade   accords  with   Cambodia.    China  and   the   Soviet  bloc
are  there,  so  is  Japan.   The  country  has  trade  accords   with
both   West   and  East   Germany,  as   with   South   and   North
Korea,  a  demonstration   of  neutralism   in  trade  as   well  as
politics.
No  Mines  or  Snipers
Much   taken  for   granted   elsewhere   seems   novel  after   a
week  in  South  Vietnam.   It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  able  to  drive
I'.O  kilometers  out  into  the  countryside  without  armed  escort
and  with  no  fear   of  mines  or  snipers.    In  a  model  village  a
squad  of   officials   in  black  trousers,   white  shirts  and  black
ties  were  waiting  to  receive  us.    High  green-tipped   sugar
palms  against  a  blue  sky  with  cotton  tufts  of  clouds provided
the  backdrop.    Children  played  with  the  pump  handle  of  a
new   village  well  and  roamed  with  the   geese   and  chickens
under  the  thatched  houses  built  on  stilts.   Birds  and flowers
were  everywhere.    We  were  proudly  shown  outdoor  toilets,
a  clean  though  rudimentary  hospital   and  dispensary,  and  a
training  school  for  midwives  attended  by  bright-eyed   nurses
in  starched  white  uniforms.   We  inspected  a  new  school  with
;•.  children's  playground.    Then  we  drove  out   of  the   village
!>a?t  an  Esso  station  and  two  bonzes  walking  along  the  road
•n  ..'range  robes  under  white  parasols.    We  inspected'a  dam
being  built  to  make  possible  two  rice  crops  a  year,  a  novel
departure    in   an    easy-going    country,   underpopulated    by
Asian   standards,  where  a  favorite   saying  has  been  "If   it
grows,"  i.e.  wild,  "why  bother  to  plant  it?"     On  our  way
back  that  evening in  Pnom  Ponh  we  visited  a  lovely  pagoda,
lit  up  like  a  Christmas  tree  with  bright  red  and  green  lights.
A  rather  pompous  bonze  inside  wanted  to  know  how  many
Buddhists  there  were  in  the  United  States  and  lost  all  inter-
est  in  further  conversation   when  told  very  few.    The  tiny
temple  bells  tinkling  sweetly   in  the  evening  breeze  in   the
darkening   garden   outside   were    unforgettable.
The   ruler  of  this  Oklahoma  sized  kingdom  with  its  five-
million  people has  had  to  make  up  for  its  military  weakness
with  political  guile.    In  steering  a  course  amid  international
. ivalries   and   revolutionary  pressure,   Prince   Sihanouk   has
far    outdistanced   LBJ   as   a   wheeler-dealer.      The   Prince
ascended  the  throne  at  the  age  of  18  in  1941  at  the  begin-
ning  of  the  most  turbulent  period  in  its  history.   He  wrested
independence  from  the  French  before  the  Geneva  conference,
l'»rced  the  withdrawal  of  the  invading  Viet  Minh  and  by  a
f   hour  "sitdown  strike"  at   Geneva  delayed  the   signing  of
the  Geneva  accords  until  Molotov  and  Chou  En-lai  gave  way
on  h
;
s  demand  that  Cambodia,  unlike  Vietnam,  not  be  neu-
tralized.    It  was  left  free  to  import  arms  and  to  make  de-
fensive  alliances.    Cambodia  was  then   considered   the   most
pro-Western  of  the  new  regimes  in  Indo-China.    Since  then.
Here's  The  Answer,  Mr. Buchwald
"If  it  takes  500  B-52 bombers 3,000 tons  of  bombs  to
shut  down  one  road  from  North  Vietnam,  it  will  take
the  Viet  Cong  how  long  to  open  that  road?"
—Art  Buchwald   "Testing  the  Testers"   May  19.
"American  targets  in  North  Vietnam  included .  .  .  the
road through the  Mu Gia  pass,  a  gateway to  the  Ho  Chi
Minh  trail,   [which]  was  reported  cut  in  three  places.
U.S.  pilots  have  repeatedly  reported  blocking  the  pass,
but  the  Communists  have  always reopened it  quickly."
—AP  from  Saigon  in  Washington  Star  May  12.
"USAF  reconnaissance  of   the  supply  roadnet  from
North  to  South  Vietnam  has  located  about  sixty  such
choke  points.   ["Stretches  of  road  which,  if  taken out,
cannot  easily  be  bypassed,  creating  traffic  bottlenecks."]
Since  the  North  Vietnamese  are  putting  effort  into  re-
pairing  roads  and  bridges,  these  choke  points  must  be
hit   every   two  days  if   the  roadnet  is   to  be   effectively
kept  closed.    The   North  Vietnamese   are  able   to   get
traffic   moving   through   damaged  choke   points   in   an
average  of  48  hours."
— Those  Bombings   in  North  Vietnam,  in  Air  Force,
organ  of  the  Air   Force  Association,  April  1906.
Prince    Sihanouk   has    shown   extraordinary    agility.      He
checked   republican   sentiment   by   resigning   the   throne   in
1955  in  favor  of  his  father,   thus  freeing   himself  for  that
active  participation   in  politics   which  was  not   allowed  him
so  long  as  he  was  king.    He  outmaneuvered  the  local  Com-
munists  by  joining  the  neutralist  camp  at  Bandung,  in  re-
turn   for    promises   of    "non-interference"     by    Communist
China  and   North   Vietnam.    A  month  later  he   signed   his
first  agreement  for .direct  military  aid  from  the  U.S.    Later
that year his  "Popular  Socialist" party  won 80%  of the  votes
and  all  of  the  91 seats  in  the  National   Assembly.
Sihanouk  could,  if  he  were  not  so  clever,  truly  say  "L'etat
c'est  moi."   It  is  as  if  he  were  a  Louis  XIV,  a  Tito  and  a
Harry  Truman  rolled  into  one.   No one has  been  more  skilful
at  getting  aid  from  all  sides.    At  home,  "Monseigneur"  has
managed   to   reconcile   monarchy   with   a   democratic    facade,
Five  Year  Plans,  and  enough  "socialism" to  make  Cambodia
seem  fraternal  if  confusing  in  Moscow  and  Peking.    In  his
spare   time,  he  writes   first-rate   editorials   for   his   French
language  press  and  composes  popular   songs.    There's  been
nothing  quite  like  him  in  all  the  annals  of  statecraft.     He's
genuinely  popular.   His  country  unlike  Laos  and  South  Viet-
nam  is troubled  by no  Communist  guerrillas.  Indeed  it  is  the
only  regime  in  Southeast  Asia  where  the  Communists  have
been  contained.   This  is what  makes  consistent  U.S.   hostility
to   him   seem   so  irrational.     The   Communist   Chinese   have
treated   Sihanouk  with   a   social   and  political   "correctness"
Probably  The  Most  Expensive  Hunting Operations  in  The  History  of  Human  Warfare
"U.S.  planes  flew  305  sorties   in  South  Vietnam  in  sup-
port  of  ground  troops,  killing  30  Viet  Cong.  .  .  ."
—AP  from  Saigon  in  Washington Star  May  16.
"U.S.   and   South   Vietnamese   planes   flew   563   sorties
Thursday  against   enemy  fortifications   and  troop  areas  in
South  Vietnam.   The  American  pilots,  who  made  376  such
flights,  said  they  killed  51  Viet  Cong."
—AP  from  Saigon in  Washington  Post, May  SI.
These  are   typical   figures   from  the   daily   summaries   of
air  action  in  South  Vietnam.    In  the  first  it  took  10 sorties
to  kill  one  VC;  in  the  second,  it  took  seven.    This   seemed
like  a  very  expensive  way  to  kill  Viet  Cong  so  we  checked
with  the  Pentagon   to  get   some  idea  of  costs.    These  are
the  figures  we  were  given:  It  cost  about  $150  to  $200  an
hour  to  operate  a  fighter  plane.   The  average  mission  lasts
two  hours.   Each  plane  carries  from  4,000  to  8,000  pounds
of  bombs,  which  cost  about  $350  per   1,000  pounds.    So  the
average  load  runs  from   $1400  to  $2800.    It  costs  close   to
$2  million  for  each  fighter  plane  and  $375,000  to  train  the
pilot.    Without  counting  these  capital  costs  and  the  value
of  the  bombs,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  the  first  summary
above  it  cost  from  $1500  to  $2000  each  in  operational  costs
alone  to  kill  one VC, while  in  the  second  the  average  oper-
ational  cost  was  from  $1000  to  $1500.    This  is  probably  the
most   expensive   kill  cost  of  any   combat  operation   in   his-
tory,   even   assuming   that   all  the   dead   are   enemies   and
none  hapless  peasants.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  30,1966
intended  to  demonstrate  their  readiness  to  co-exist  with  dif-
ferent   social  regimes   on  their   borders.    But  the   U.S.  has
allied  itself  with  Cambodia's  ancient  enemies—the  Thais  and
the  Viets—and  sought  through  the  CIA  to  overthrow  him.
A  "Free  Serei" movement aimed  at  Sihanouk serves  as guide
and  tool  for  our  Special  Forces.   Sihanouk, like Cambodians
generally,  fears  the  Viet,  whether  Communist or anti-Com-
munist.   As  late  as  March 6,  1964, he  accused  Hanoi  of being
as  "vague  as  the  Anglo-Saxons"  in  replying  to  his   request
for   a  guarantee   of  his  borders.    But  Prince  Sihanouk  has
come  to believe  the  Viet  Cong will  win and  that his  country's
safety   lies  in  cultivating  good  relations  with  the  rebels  and
with   Hanoi.    "Our   American  friends   are   remarkable   or-
ganizers,   brilliant   technicians   and  excellent   soldiers,"  the
Prince   wrote   three  years   ago.     "But   their   incontestable
realism  stops  short  of  the  realm  of  poltiics,  where  the  atti-
tude  of  the  ostrich  seems  to  them  to  conform  to  their  best
interests."
The  Cambodian  attitude  toward  the  Vietnamese  war  was
reflected  while  I  was  there  in  the  April  22  issue  of  Realties
"Maybe  I  don't  have  the  education  or  understanding,
but  I  wonder  what  we're  doing  here  anyhow," said  the
captain,  "I'm all  for  killing  Charley but  I  wonder  what's
the  point  if  the  Vietnamese can't  get  the  benefit of  our
being  here  and'  fighting  their  war  for  them."
—"U.S.  Officers    Complain of  Viet  Unrest"  by  Ralph
B.  Kennan  from  Saigon  in  Baltimore   Sun,  May  SS.
Cambodgiennes,  an  unofficial  mouthpiece.    It  carried  an  in-
terview  with  a  2nd  Lt.  Tram  Minh  Bach  of  the  South  Viet-
namese  Air  Force who had  fled  for  refuge  to  Cambodia.   He
defected   after   he  was   upbraided   in  brutal   and   insulting
fashion  by  his  American  "advisor"  in  front  of  his  own  men.
He  said,  "The  Americans  act  like  bosses  and  treat  us  like
'boys'"—the  word  "boy"  as  thus  used  in  French  is  an  echo
of   colonialism.   When  he  was  asked  jf   he  might  join  the
Viet  Cong,  the  2nd  Lt.  replied  that  he  opposed  both  Com-
munist  and  American  domination of  his  country.    "The   na-
tionlist  and  independent  policy  of  Prince  Sikanouk  is  basi-
cally  the  best  for  this  region,"  he  said.    "He  defends  his
country   and  nothing  more   and  he  makes   it   progress  in
peace.    That   is  an  example  all  Vietnamese  patriots  ought
to  meditate."
An  unsigned  editorial   in  the  same  issue  put  forward   a
subtler  neutralist  view.   It  dealt  with  the  nationalist  demon-
strations  against  Ky   in   Hue  and   Saigon   as  led  by   the
Buddhists  under  Thich  Tri  Quang.    It  derided  the  idea  of
free   elections   in  a   country   "Where  the   government   only
controls  a  fifth  of  the  territory  and  a  quarter  of  the  popula-
tion."   It  said  that  while  the  nationalists  were  tired  of  the
Wall  St.  Journal  For  Getting  Out
"How  must  the  Vietnamese  spectacle  impress others
threatened  by  China?    It  is  beginning  to  appear  that
if  the  war  ever  ends  and  South  Vietnam  has  somehow
been   saved  from   Communism,   we   will   have   on   our
hands  a  nation  in  shreds. ...  On balance, then,  it  looks
as  if  the  U.S.  is  losing  more  than  it  is  gaining  in  its
own  interest  of  combatting  Communism  and  promoting
freedom. ...  It  takes  courage  to  stand  up to interna-
tional  Communist barbarians; no  less  courage to  admit
it,  if  such  is  the  case,  when  a  military-political  situa-
tion  has  gone  hopelessly  sour."
—Wall  Street Journal, "The Turning  Point"  May  U.
war,  disgusted  with  American  -lomination  and  hostile  to  the
military junta  in  Saigon,  they  were  so  compromised  by  their
own  political  pasts  as  to  fear   NLF  reprisals  if  the  Ameri-
cans  left    "In  fact,  all  the  nationalists  of  Hue,  Danang  and
Saigon  want," the  editorial  continued, "is  that  the  U.S.  allow
them  to  replace  the  team  presently  in  power  while  the  U.S.
continues  to  'protect  them  against  the  Viet  Cong."   It  ad-
vises  true  nationalists  to  join  the  National  Liberation  Front
"so  that  they  can  counterbalance   the  Communist  influence
there  and preserve  the  future."   It  draws  a  parallel  with  the
French  resistance  where  Gaullists  fought  side  by  side  with
Communists.    This  allowed  the  non-Communists after  liber-
ation  "to  bring  into  being  a  government  in  which  the Com-
munists  had  a  place—but  no  more  than  that."   It  said  the
time  had   come  for   joint   action   between   Nationalists   and
Communists   to   establish   a   provisional   government  which
would  ask  for  American withdrawal.    "We  sincerely  believe,"
the  editorial  concluded, "that  the  Americans,  no  longer  hav-
ing  a  juridical  excuse  to  justify   their  presence,   would  ac-
quiesce  in  this  demand—and  would  not  be  so  displeased,  in
reality,  to  put  an  end  to  an  adventure  which,  carried  to  its
conclusion,  as   they   are   already   sufficiently   aware,   would
result  inevitably  in  a  disaster  for  them."   In  the Cambodian
view,  only  joint  action  against  the  U.S.  can  prevent  a  Com-
munist  takeover  in  Vietnam  and  make  possible  a  neutralist
solution.    This  reflects  Prince  Sihanouk's  own  wily  record,
in  which  he  has  outmaneuvered  Communists  not  by  fighting
them  but  by  taking   them  into   camp.
I  had  hoped  while  in  Cambodia to  speak  with  some  repre-
sentative  of  the  NLF or  at  least  with  Wilfred  Burchett, who
has  been   covering  the  war   iV>ja  the  rebel  side.    Burchett
was  in  Hanoi,  but  from  another  source  in  close  touch  with
the  Front  and  recently  returned  from  Viet  Cong  territory  I
was  given  a  summary  of  its  views.
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Does  the  Associated  Press  Consider  Such  Reporting  Too  Frank  for  the  U.S. Press?
"The  political instability in  Vietnam is  gravely damaging
the. prestige  and  influence  of  the  U.S.  in  the  country.  .  .  .
The  contacts  between  the   American  authorities   and  the
Generals  is  reduced to  polite smiles  and ambiguous promises
and  equally  to  continual  demands  for  money. ...  It  seems
that  the  more  heavily (he  Americans intervene  in  the  war,
the  more  their  reputation  with  the  people  decreases.   This
is  in  great  part  due to  operations  against  the  Viet  Cong  in
the  course  of  which  hundreds  of  villages  are  crushed.   The
innocent,  perish  and  the  number  of  refugees  increases.
"In  the  shanty-towns  near  the  urban  centers,  there  is  de-
veloping  a  new  proletarian  class  tired of  the  war  and  ready
to  listen  to  the  peace  promises  of  the  Viet  Cong.    On  the
other   hand,   in   Saigon,   the   Generals   in   red   parachutist
berets,  displaying  their  rows  of  medals,  declare  themselves
ready  to  pursue  the  war  to  final  victory,  with  U.S.  troops
and  money.   In  the  meantime Vietnamese  soldiers  desert
at   the  rate  of   6,000  per  month.    [Secretary   MeNamara
admitted   under   questioning  at   a   Senate   hearing   (Wash.
Post  May  12)  that  desertions  have  been  even  higher  than
10,000  to  12,000  a  month—IPS]
"The  massive  bombardments,  the  artillery  fire,  the   sol-
diers   clambering   around   [crapahutant]   in   the    regions
devastated  by  the  war,  have  not  contributed  to  American
prestige.     Words  like  "the   free   world,"  anti-Communism
and  democracy find no  echo  among  the  peasants.   The Viet-
cong   have   succeeded   more  and  more  in   controlling   the
economy,  especially   in  the  Mekong  delta.    On  the   other
hand  the  great  bases  tend  to  isolate  the  American  soldiers.
A  high  officer   declared  'We  have  fewer  friends   than  we
had  a  year  ago  before  we  began  to  send  in  troops.'"
—From   an   AP   Saigon  dispatch  dated   May   1Z   in   Le
Monde  of  May  IS.    When  we  failed   to  find  it  in  any   US.
paper  we  checked  with  AP.    We  were  told  it  was  an  AP
special  for   Le  Monde.   We've  yet  to  see  the  AP  write   as
frankly   for  its   U.S.  clients.
7   J
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, May SO, 1966
An  Interview  With  An  Unofficial  Spokesman for  the  NLF
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
"It  is  not  true  that  Peking  forbids  Hanoi  to  talk  peace
or  that   Hanoi  forbids   the  NLF  to  do  so," my  informant
said.  "The  Front  is  free  to  negotiate.   Washington must  un-
derstand  that     the   Front   is  not  a   tool  of  Peking.    The
Front   claims   to  be  the   sole   representative   of  the   South
Vietnamese  people  in  the  sense  that  there  is  no  other  or-
ganized  force  with  which  to  deal.    Any  group  can  join  the
Front  if   it   is  sincerely  for   independence  and  the   end  of
American  intervention.   The  door  is  open."
My  informant  said  this  was  why  the  Front  had  never  set
up  a  provisional government,  though  it  has  a  parallel  admin-
istration  everywhere in  South  Vietnam.   It  wants  as  broadly
based  a  government  as  possible  for  the  final  take-over.    It
has  no  faith  in  elections.    It  doubts  that  they  will  be  held
and  feels  sure  that  if  they  are  held, they  will  be  as  phony  as
were  those  under  Diem.   "It  is  wrong  to  think,"  my inform-
ant  told  me, "that  the  Front  is  strong  only  in  the  villages.
In  every  mission, in  every  part  of  the  government, the  Front
has  its   people.    When  a  South  Vietnamese  soldier  gets  a
15-day  pass  to  go  home  and  visit  his  native  village,  he  goes
to  an  office  of  the  Front  and  gets  it  stamped  to  assure  him
a  safe  conduct. ' When trucks  go out  of  Saigon  to  Mytho  they
obtain  a  laissez-passer  from  the  South  Vietnamese  govern-
ment.   But  on  top  of  this,  outside  Saigon,  there  is  stamped
an  authorization  of  the  Front.
Collects  Taxes  Even  in  Saigon
"The  Front  collects  taxes  in  every  city,  including  Saigon.
It  is  already  planning  for  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order
in  Saigon  when  the  government  falls  apart  and  it  takes over.
The  Front  realizes  there will be a  serious  problem  to  prevent
looting  and  killing.    The  day  Saigon  is  liberated   the  only
protection  the  Americans  will  have  will  be  the  Front.  Pro-
tection  will  not  be  easy  in  a  city  of  2,000,000  seething  with
hatred.   The  problem  is  made  the  more  serious  because Sai-
gon  has  become  a  city  from  which  law  and  morals  have dis-
appeared.    The  day  authority  is  finally  transferred  to  the
Front  will  -be  a  critical  one and  the  Front  has  several  dozens
of  armed  cadres  trained  and  ready  to  take  over  control  and
maintain  law  and  order.                                            -
"U.S.  emissaries,"  he  continued,  "want  to  negotiate  some
way  to  stay  in  South  Vietnam..  They  are  wrong.   They  have
to  leave  just  as  the  French  did.  Only  then  can  they  have
an  embassy  negotiate   trade   relations   and  discuss  economic
aid.     But  first,  all  traces  of  occupation  must  be  ended.
"The  Front  wants  a  neutral  foreign  policy.   It  sees  reuni-
fication  as  a  thing  of  the  distant  future.    Too  many  differ-
ences  and  difficulties  make  it  impossible at  this  time.    The
Gallup  Poll  Shows  Rising  Peace  Sentiment
For  the  first  time  since  last  July,  the   Gallup  poll
(Washington  Post  May  22)  showed  approval  of  John-
son's  policies  in  Vietnam  below  the  50%  mark—it  was
47%.      More  important,  the  latest  poll  showed  54%  for
withdrawal  and  only  28%  for  continuation  of  U.S.  ef-
forts  if  the  South  Vietnamese  "start  fighting  on  a  big
scale  among  themselves."    If  the  South  Vietnam  gov-
ernment  decides to  stop  fighting  altogether, 72%  think
the  U.S. should   withdraw   and  only   16%  think   our
troops  should  stay  on.    Asked  if  South  Vietnam  could
establish   "a  stable  government",  only   32%  answered
"yes"  48%  "no".    The  rest  were  undecided.    The  re-
plies  showed  very  little  difference  between Republicans
and  Democrats.   Gallup   reported   "overwhelming  ap-
proval"  only  for  Administration  peace  efforts.
internal  policy  will  be  socialist,  but  not  'like  China  or  North
Vietnam;  it  will be  another  of  those  forms  of  Asian  socialism
of  which  some variant  may  be  found  everywhere  in  this  re-
gion.   The U.S.  must  realize  that  this  is  a  struggle  for  in-
dependence,  not  a  war  of  aggression.    The  Front  regards
Thich  Tri  Quang  as  a  man  of  the  Middle  Ages  who  wants
some  way  to  keep  U.S.  troops  in  South  Vietnam.   It  wants
a  truly  independent  South Vietnam.  Even  Ho Chi Minh's  idea
of  a  bi-federal  union  is  something  for  the  future."
Only  by  Peace  and  Politics
The  NLF  sees  the  Indonesian  People's  Conference  as  the
possible  germ of a  larger  neutralist  confederation  that  might
some day  unite  South  Vietnam, Laos  and  Cambodia.   So does
Prince  Sihanouk.   The Conference  last  year  brought  together
neutralist  and  Communist Front  representatives   from  North
and  South  Vietnam  and  from  Laos  with  those  of  Cambodia.
South  Vietnamese  neutralist  exiles  from  Paris  were  also  in
attendance.    The  Conference  is  soon  to  open  a   permanent
office  in Pnom  Penh which might  someday play a part in peace
talks.    The  little  publicized  recent   visit  to  Moscow  by  the
King   of   Laos   and   his   Prime   Minister,   Prince   Souvanna
Phouma   (Le   Monde,  May  19)  indicate  that  they  are  still
thinking  along  neutralist  lines,  too.   Cambodia's  ruler  be-
lieves  that  only  by  peace  and  politics  can  Communism  be
contained.   For  12 years  the  United  States  has  tried  to  con-
tain  it  by  military   dictatorship,   repression   and  war.  The
Viet  Cong is  far  stronger  today  than  when  it  started.   After
12  years,  Cambodia's  success   and   our   failure,   Cambodia's
progress  and  Vietnam's  suffering,  should  be  enough  to  show"
which  is  the  wiser  course.
You  Can  Still  Start  A  Gift  Sub With  These  On-the-Spot  Reports  from  Vietnam  and  Cambodia
IE  Stone's  Weekly
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew  (or  enter)
Name  ....................................
Street  ..................................
city   ....................;.................
For  the  enclosed  $5 send
(To)   Name  ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
....Zone... ...... ...State.....
a  gift  sub  to:
5/30/66
City  ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    FifOe*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week'  in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the  U.S.:  $6  in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED