I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966oct31.pdf

============================================================

How HUAC  Lies About Its Paid Informers,  P.  2
Not  Worth Much in Battle  But  They'll Provide  Glorious LBJ  Headlines  From  Manila
"Any    commitments  [of   more  Asian  troops  at  Manila]
would  surely  involve  only a  token  number  of  troops of  dubi-
ous military  value.  U.S.  officers  recall wryly  that  upon their
arrival   in  Vietnam  Philippine   security  troops,  who  were
sent  to  protect  the  Filipino combat engineers  already there,
in  turn  had  to  be  protected  by  U.S.  forces.   Yet  even  these
contributions  would  dramatize Allied  support  for  President
Johnson's  Asian policy  and thus  provide a  psychological  lift.
.  .  .  Aside  from  the  Korean  and  Australian  forces  U.S.  of-
ficials  regard  the  Asian  military  contributions  in  Vietnam
as  nearly  more  bother  than  they  are  worth."
—Wall  Street  Journal,  Oct. 21.
I. K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  34
October   31,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
16  CENTS
Ho  Chi  Johnson  Mobilizes  Little  Old  New  Asia
Honolulu  was  dreamed   up  to  distract  attention   from   the
Fulbright  hearings;   Manila,  to  get  Johnson   off  the  hook  of
that  exuberant  promise  last  July  to  campaign  in  all  50  States.
Too   many  Democratic   candidates   had   suggested   that   they
might  do  better  if  he  stayed  away.    How  keep  Johnson   on
the  front  pages  and  the  TV  screens  in  the  meantime?    The
Republicans  provided  the  idea  for  an  Asia  peace  conference.
So  we  have  had  this  magnificent   Madison  avenue   charade;
Johnson,   crossing    the   Pacific   with   giant   strides   in    the
search  for  peace,  high  above  partisan  politics,  and  even  turn-
ing  up  for  the  camera  men  with  his  troops   in  Vietnam  on
the  Frontiers  of  Freedom.    The  trip  has  been  a  public  rela-
tions  man's  dream,  an  immensely  successful  travelling  rodeo.
Only  Two  Days  of  The  Seventeen
True, Manila has not  exactly been  a peace  conference.    How,
as  Goldwater,   that  innocent,  asked  on  TV  last  Monday,  do
you  have  a  peace  conference  when  the  other  side  isn't  there?
Nor   has  it  been   a  war  conference.     It  is  hard  to  see  what
kind  of  a  conference  it  has  been,  except  a  conference  to  get
Johnson's  picture  with  all  those  Asian  potentates.    The  sched-
ule  is  indicative.   Of  17  days  allotted  to  the  trip,  barely  two
were   devoted   to   the   conference   itself.    There   was  hardly
time  to  read  much  less  debate  the  3,000  words  of  the  triple
pronunciamentoes  prefabricated   for   it:   The   Goals   of   Free-
dom,   the   Communique,   and   the   Declaration   on   Peace   and
Progress  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific.    The  verbiage  was  familiar
State  Department  prose  garnished with Johnsonian  evangelism
about  "men   and  nations"  having  "no  choice  but  to  live  to-
gether  like  brothers."    There's  nothing  like  a  little  old-time
religion  while  Cain  bombs  the  hell  out  of  Abel.
The  heart  of  the  three  documents,  the  signal—as  diplomats
say—is   "former   enemies  are   asked  only  to   lay  down  their
weapons."    This  is our  friend  from  World  War  II,  uncondi-
tional  surrender.  No   peace  conference,  no  negotiations,   are
necessary.    If  North   Vietnam  stops   helping  the  rebels   and
the  rebels  give  up,  we  are  willing  to  stop  fighting,  too.     To
this  magnificent   offer  to  let  them  surrender,  there  was  added
—"for  dramatic  effect",  as  one  U.S.   official  explained  to  the
press—a  promise   that  six  months   after,   our  troops  will  be
withdrawn.    If  the  other   side  does  not  accept  this,  we  step
The  SEP  on  Auschwitz  and  Vietnam
"It  can  easily  be  said  there  is  no  connection  between
Auschwitz  and Vietnam. .  .  .  The  fact  remains  that  in
this  'just'  struggle  against  Communism, we  are  killing
civilians  as  surely  as  any  Communist  ever  did.   Our
bombs  drop  on  friend  and  foe  alike;  our  napalm burns
them  alive,  friend  and enemy.  .  .  .We  are  certainly  not
Nazis.    We  provide  doctors  to  treat   the  children  we
have  bombed.   We  hold  'elections'  so  we  can  reassure
ourselves   of   popular  support.    And  we   promise   that
some  day  we  will  provide money  to  rebuild  the  land  we
are  destroying.    But  what  if  the  end  does  not  justify
the means?  . .. What if  no future form of  'freedom' can
ever  make  up  for  the  pain  being  inflicted  now?    Some
strategists   say   the  Vietnamese  must  suffer  their  role
as  pawns  .  .  .  [in]   the  containment of  Communism on
a  global  scale. ...  It  is  a  harsh  doctrine,  not  unlike
shooting  a  few  hostages  to  make  the  rest  of  the  popu-
lation  behave.  .  .  .  Some  day  we  will  wonder  why  we
keep  on  being  sheep."
—Saturday  Evening  Post editorial,  Oct. 22.
up  the  bombings  and  pour  in  more  troops.    As  Johnson  said
at  Canberra,  "we  cannot  tire  of  sacrifice  until  peace  comes  to
Vietnam."     LBJ  is  the  world's  most  indefatigable  pacifist.
There  is hardly  a  phrase  in  the  creamy prose  of  the  Manila
documents  which  is  not  an  affront.     Asia,  the  Continent  of
the  Coolie,  where  the  poor  have  been  miserable  and  despised
since  human  time  began,  is  described  as  having  "a  rich  heri-
tage  of  the  intrinsic worth  and  dignity  of  every  man!"     The
signers  are  symbols  of  everything  Asia's  poor  have  been  re-
belling  against:  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  which  bar  the
brown  and  yellow  man  from  their  empty  spaces  to  keep  them
white  men's  preserves;  the  military  dictators  of   three   small
Asian   countries   where   the   rich   landowners   and   merchants
look  to  U.S.  support  to  keep  them  going  a  little  longer;  the
leader   of   the  fantastically  corrupt   Filipino   oligarchy,   whose
islands  are  another  U.S.   military  outpost.    These  peripheral
pygmies  precariously poised  on  the  edges  of  a  giant  Continent
in  eruption   are  orchestrated   by  a  Texan  as  the  voice  of   the
New  Asia.    Only  in  America  could   anybody  get  away  with
such  cosmic  nonsense
]   3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.-F. Stone's  Weekly,  October 31, 1966
Wayne  Hays  Discloses   That  Witnesses  Were  Secretly  Paid  by  "Consultant"  Contracts
Plain and Fancy Lying by HUAC Members  in the Debate on the Chicago Cases
The   House  debate  Oct.  IS   on  HVAC's    Chicago   contempt
citations  were  noteworthy  for  two  reasons.   The  first  is  that
on  a  motion   to  recommit   there  were  90  votes  against   the
House   Committee   on   Un-American   Activities,  the   highest
ever  in  a  vote  against  a  contempt  citation.    The  entire  Chi-
cago  delegation  voted  against  HUAC  (the  vote  was  90 to 181
with  161  not  voting).    The  three  cited  were  Dr.   Jeremiah
Stamler, director  of  the  heart  disease  control  program  of  the
Chicago  Board  of  Health;  his  research  assistant,  Mrs.   Yo-
landa  Hall  and  social  worker  Milton  Cohen.   Dr.  Stamler's
eminence  in  his  field  evoked  a  petition  of  protest  from  doc-
tors,  scientists  and  lawyers  which  filled  over  %1  pages  of   the
Congressional   Record  in  agate  type.    The  second  important
aspect   of   the  debate  were  the  false   and  misleading   replies
given  by  members   of   HUAC   when  Rep.   Wayne   Hays    (D.
Ohio)   asked  whether  HUAC   was  secretly   paying  witnesses
by  giving   them  "consultant"   contracts.    We  give  the  record
here  in  abridged   form:
Mr.  HAYS  (D.  Ohio):  Will  the  gentleman   inform  me  as
to  whether  these  so-called  witnesses   were  paid  by  the  com-
mittee,  or  were  under  contract  to  the  committee  and  paid  in
that  fashion?
Mr.  WELTNER   (D.  Ga.)  :  The  two  witnesses  were   Lola
Belle  Holmes  and  Lucious  Armstrong   who,  as  the   hearings
elicited,  had   previously  maintained   some  relationship   with
the  FBI.    To  the  best  of  my  knowledge, information  and  be-
lief,  there  was  no  contract   or  remuneration   with  regard  to
these  two.
A  Gentleman's Word
Mr.  HAYS:  I  am  glad  to  take  the  gentleman's   word  that
they  were  not  paid.
Mr.  WELTNER:  I  am  not  stating  that,  if  the  gentleman
please,  I  am stating  that  I  have  no knowledge or  information
of   any  kind  of  remuneration  or  compensation  to  these  wit-
nesses  with  regard  to  Milton  Mitchell  Cohen.
Mr.  HAYS:  The  gentleman  is  aware,  however,  Mr.  Speak-
er,  that  in  times  past  the  House  Committee on  Un-American
Activities  has   paid  witnesses   and   has   used   the   device  of
putting  them  under  contract  to  keep  their  names  from  the
public  records?
Mr.  WELTNER:  I  have  no  knowledge  of  such  a  practice.
Mr.  HAYS:  /  will  tell  the  gentleman   that   I  have  signed
contracts  u-hich  I  hare  been  told  as  chairman  of  the  Contract
Committee,   u-as  a  device   to  keep  these  witnesses'   names  off
the   ]>nblic  payroll.    [Italic  added.]
Mr.  WILLIS  (D. La., Chairman of  HUAC) :  There  should
be  no payment.   I  regret  to  say  that  I  do  not  know  what  the
gentleman  is  talking  about.
What  If  They  Are Communists?
Mrs.  Yolanda Hall,  Dr.  Stamler's  research  assistant,
appeared  as  a  defense  witness  in  the  1949  Smith  Act
trials  of  Communist  Party  leaders  and then stated  that
she  was  a  Communist.    HUAC  claims  that  Communist
meetings  were  held  in  Dr.  Stamler's  home  until  1958
when  he  became  director  of  the  heart  disease  control
program  at  the  Chicago Board of  Health.   What  if  Dr.
Stamler   and  his  assistant   were  or  are  Communists?
He  is  one  of  the  great  men in  this  field.  What do their
politics  have  to  do  with  heart  disease?     Why  should
their- work  be disrupted?    The  United States  is  the  only
country  in  the  "free  world" (except  West  Germany  and
South   Africa)    where   Communists   are   outlawed   or
hounded.   These  are  the  deeper questions  raised  by  the
Chicago   cases.
Mr.  HAYS:   You  mean   to  say  that  you  never  heard  of
committee   contracts?
Mr.  WILLIS:  I  might  say  of  course  we have  people  under
contract  as  consultants.     But  that  is  not  talking  about  wit-
nesses.    My  goodness,  that  has  never  been  indulged  in.
Mr. HAYS:  The gentleman  never  had  a  witness  under  con-
tract  or  gave  him a  contract  because  he  was  a  witness?
Mr.  WILLIS:  Perhaps  as  a  consultant,  I  do not  know,  but
not  as  a  witness.  . And not  a  dime  was  ever  paid  to  any  wit-
ness  to  procure  evidence,  or  anything  of  the  sort.
Mr.  HAYS:  They  have  been  put  under  contract  after  they
testified.
Hays   two  days  later  put   into  the  Congressional  Record
(Appendix,   Oct.  20, p.  5454)  a  list  of  HUAC  contracts  over
the  past  six  years  totalling  more  than   $35,000.    The  first
on  the  list,  Philip  Luce,  was  given  his  $1,000  contract  just
six  days  after  he  turned  up  Aug.  16 as  a  "friendly  witness"
against  his  former  comrades  in the  Progressive  Labor  Party.
The  others  listed  by  Hays  were:
1966:  Geo  H.  Lynch,  Oct.  11,  $3,000.   1965:  John Sullivan,
June  25,  $3,600;  Wm.  Hendrix,  July  2,  $250; Geo.  H.  Lynch,
Aug.  20,  $3,000;  John  D.  Sullivan,  Sept.  2,  $3,600,  Dec.  28,
$3,600.    19644:  Margaret  Ann  Kerr,  Aug.  24,  $800; Andrew
J.  Berecz,  Oct. 2,  $200;  Chas.  S.  Weatherholt, Oct  2,  $378.59;
Geo.  H.  Lynch,  Jan.  2,  $4,500.    1963:  John  Santo,  Mar.  14,
$2,500;  Geo.  H.  Lynch,  July  17,  $1,000;  Margaret  Ann  Kerr,
July  17,  $1,800;  John  Lautner,  Dec.  11,  $1,000;  Herbert Rom-
erstein,  Dec.  11,  $1,000.   1962:  Ruth  Taylor  Hunter,  Feb.  1,
$1,800      1961:   Maurice   Malkin,   June   8,   $400;   Lillian   E.
Howard,  May  3,  $1,800.
Elizabeth  Bentley  Got  $100 A  Day—HUAC  Also  Keeps  Files on  Congressmen
Wnyne   Hays   (D.  Ohio)   in  the  House  Oct.  18:
"Let  me  recite  a  little  history.    When  I  came  to  this body
18  years  ago,  there  was  a  big  Democratic  class.    The  only
committee  assignment   I  could   get,   unfortunately,   was   on
the    House    Administration    Committee.    The   first   thing
brought  to  that  committee  that  caused  any  trouble  was  a
big  bill  to  pay  a  woman,  whose  name,  if  I  recall correctly,
was   Elizabeth  Bentley.    It  was  for  $100  a  day.    And  that
was  a  lot  of  money  back  in  those  days,  if  I  remember cor-
rectly,  for staying  over  at  the  Congressional in  a  big  suite—
and  the  meals  ran  pretty  high,  too.    Being  a  country boy,
I  was  not  used  to  that  kind  of  high  living  then, and  I ques-
tioned  it  a  little  bit.   Some  of  the  people on  the  Committee
on  Un-American  Activities  have had  it  in  their  nose  for  me
ever  since.    And  I  get  reports  from  time  to  time  of  some
of   the  holier-than-thou  staff   people  who  have  such  a  big
file  on  Members  of  the  Congress."
These are  important footnotes for  the  history  of the  witch
hunt.   This  is  the  first  time it  was  ever  revealed  that  Eliza-
beth  Bentley,  who  ranked  second  only  to  Whitaker  Cham-
bers  among  the  sensational informers of  the  40s,  was  paid
$100  a  day  by  HUAC.   This  is  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  an
affidavit  published in  this  Weekly  Jan.  16,  1956,  by  defense
counsel   in   a   libel  suit   brought   by   one  of   the   men   she
smeared.    The   affidavit   said  that  Miss  Bentley  in  a  pre-
trial  interrogation  in  Louisiana  said  her  book  "Out  of  Bond-
age",   based  on  her  HUAC  testimony,  was  fictional  rather
than  factual.   The  -victim  won  his  suit.
We  suggest  that  when  the  new  Congress  convenes, some
member  demand to  know  the  full  truth  about  Hay's  further
revelation—that  HUAC  keeps files on members of  Congress.
This  is  what  got  McCarthy  into  trouble in  the  Senate.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  October  31, 1966
Faceless?    So  Were  The  European  Resistance  Leaders  Against  The  Nazis
Bernard  Fall's Reply  to CIA-Man George Carver  on  "The  Faceless  Viet  Cong"
By  Dr.  Bernard  B.  Fall
It   can  be  conceded  that  any  Communist  member  of   the
National  Liberation  Front  in  South  Viet  Nam  is  a  member
of  the  Lao Dong, the  Vietnamese  Communist  Party,  and that
North  Viet  Nam,  which  had  won  the  war  against  France  in
1954,  fully  expected  to  gain  control  of  South  Viet  Nam  as
well  either  by  the  elections  slated  for  July  1956  or  at  a  later
date.   I  am, however,  inclined to  doubt  that  Hanoi's  decision
to  intervene  was  prompted  by  any  "increasing  disparity  be-
tween  political  life  north  and  south."   For  it  became  obvious
even   to  the   blindest   of  optimists   that,  unfortunately,   the
political  lives  of  both  Viet  Nams,  far   from  becoming   "dis-
parate,"  began  to  resemble  each  other  as  only  two  extremes
can,  with  their  gradual   falsification   of  representative   proc-
esses  and,  finally,  with  their  concentration  camps  and   per-
secution  of  religious   groups.    The  existence   of  a  "Central
Reunification  Department"   in  Hanoi  of  which  much  is  made
is  surely  revelatory  of  something—until  one  becomes  aware
that  West  Germany,  for  example,  has  a  Ministry   for   All-
German  Affairs  to  which,  of  course,  East  Germany  and  the
Soviets   ascribe  equally  sinister  motives,  even  though  it  can
be  safely  assumed  that  the  Ministerium  fur   Gesamtdeutsche
Fragen  is  more  innocuous  than  any  Hanoi  committee   with
the  same  purpose.
The  Repression  Came  First
It  is  likewise  very  much  open  to  question  that  the  inter-
vention  of  Hanoi  was  first  evidenced  by  a  terror   campaign
directed  against  small  South  Vietnamese  officials.    In  actual
fact,  Diem  began  to  become  oppressive  as  early  as  January
1956,  when  a  concentration  camp  ordinance  (No.  6  of  Janu-
ary   11,  1956)   gave  the  regime   almost  unchecked  power  to
deal   with   the   opposition—and   the   non-Communist  opposi-
tion,  least  inured  to  clandestine  operations,  was  hit  hardest.
The   decision  by   Diem—probably   his   most   pregnant   in
terms  of  its  future  consequences—to  abolish   elected   village
government  in  June  1956  did the  rest.   The  hated  appointees
became  a  prime  target  for  local  resentment   and  by  March
1958  over  400  had  been  murdered  by  guerrillas  who  indeed,
as  Carver   points  out,  "harped  on  local  issues  and  avoided
preaching  Marxist   doctrine."    When  it  is  remembered  that
there  were  enough  "local  issues"  around  to  cause  the  South
Vietnamese  Army  itself  to  try  at  least three  times to murder
Diem,  it  becomes  understandable   why  South  'Viet  Nam  ap-
peared  to  Hanoi  ripe  for  plucking.    In  other  words,  there
can  be  no  doubt  but  that  Hanoi,  or  even  South   Vietnamese
stay-behind  Communist  elements,  took  advantage  of  Saigon's
glaring   weaknesses   after   1959.    But   the   Communists  can
hardly  be  held  responsible  for  the  incredible  stupidity  of  the
Diem  regime  and  the  somewhat  surprising  blindness  to  its
faults  of  its  American  advisers.
The  next  point  which  requires  clarification  is  not  whether
insurgency  in  South  Viet  Nam  is  abetted,  directed  and  aided
from  North  Viet  Nam  (it  is  to  a  large  extent),  but  whether
such  outside  controls  preclude  the  existence  of  real  objectives
which  are  specifically  those  of  the  insurgents  rather  than  of
their  external  sponsors.   Here,  the  recent  British   revelations
as  to  the  truly  enormous extent  of  the  control  of  the  French
Resistance  in  France  by  the   Special  Operations  Executive
(S.O.E.)—the   1940-1946  British   equivalent   of   the    Central
Intelligence  Agency—shows what  is  meant.   According to  the
now-published  official  history  of  S.O.E.  in  France,  "till  1944
the  British  had  a  virtual  monopoly  over  all  of  de  Gaulle's
means   of   communications   with   France,"   and   the   French
"could  not  introduce  a  single  agent  or  a  single  store" without
Allied  permission  and  help,  and  "anything  [they]   planned
with  marked  political  implications  was  liable  to  be  vetoed  by
any  of  the  three  major  Western   allies."    Yet,  having   sub-
stantiated  exactly  what  both the  Vichy  French  and the  Nazis
Without   disclosing  the  fact   that   George  A.   Carver,
Jr.,  is  a  CIA  man,  Foreign  Affairs    Quarterly  last  April
published  his  article,  "The  Faceless  Viet  Cong."   In  its
new  Fall  issue,  it  published  a  reply   by Dr.  Bernard  B.
Fall,  author  of  The  Two  Vietnams.   We  give  the  gist
of   it  here  because  we  believe  the  issues  are  of   urgent
relevance  to  any  negotiated  settlement  of  the  war.
had  said  all  along,  i.e. that  the  French  Resistance  was  noth-
ing  but  an  "Anglo-Saxon   conspiracy"  and  the  resisters  (this
writer  included)  nothing  but  foreign  agents,  the  official   his-
tory makes  the  key point:  "All  these victories  by and through
resistance  forces  in  France  had  a  common  basis:  overwhelm-
ing  popular  support."
In  spite  of  overwhelming  technical  control  by  the  Allies,
de  Gaulle  succeeded  in  winning  political  and  military  loyalty
among  the  diverse  guerrilla  forces   in  France,  and  even  de
Gaulle's  own  views  and  desires  had  to  acommodate  them-
selves  to  those   developed  by  the  internal  resistance  in  its
four-year  fight,  in which it  bore  the brunt  of the  struggle  and
suffered  the  bulk  of  the  losses.    The  differences  of  view  be-
tween  Viet  Cong  leaders  who  have  now  been  in  the  fight  for
six  years  (and  some  of  them  for  twenty!)   and  the   Hanoi
theoreticians   and   conventional  military   commanders   go  in
many  cases  far  beyond  normal  internecine  party  struggles
or  mere  disagreements.
It  is easy to  dismiss  those differences  as being  mere  camou-
flage  (after  all, some  people  believe that  the  Sino-Soviet  split
is  nothing  but  a  grand  deception  foisted  on  the  easily-fooled
West)   and  to  believe   the  N.L.F.  is  indeed  nothing  but   "a
contrived  political  mechanism  with  no  indigenous  roots,"  as
Carver  avers.    But  in  that  case,  the  220,000 Viet  Cong  who
fight  side-by-side  with  50,000  PAVN  regulars,  and  who  over
the  past three years  are  said  to  have  suffered  almost  100,000
dead  and  182,000  wounded,  fight  rather  well  for  what   must
be  a  vast  mass  of  remote-controlled    and  force-drafted   re-
cruits.    Otherwise,   desertion   would  be  just  as  easy  on  the
Viet  Cong  side  as  it  is  on  the  ARVN  side.
That  leaves,  lastly,  the  argument   of  "facelessness":   the
N.L.F.  leaders  are  men of  little  stature  in  their  own  society;
they  are  unknowns.   But  four  years  ago  only  a  few  Viet-
namese  military  men  knew  who General  Ky  was,  and  no  one
thought  of  him  even  two  years  ago  as  being  of  presidential
timber.    Aside  from  Jugoslavia's   Marshal  Tito,  it  takes  real
expertise  to  recall  the  names  of  European  resistance  leaders.
In  any  case,  N.L.F. propaganda  has  seen  to  it  that  its  leaders
should  not  remain  anonymous: at  least  forty  senior  leaders'
biographies   have  been  published,  along  with  their   photos.
Their   background  shows  the   normal  social  background  of
Vietnamese  leadership  in  general,  from  medical  doctors  and
pharmacists,  to  lawyers  and  even  army  officers   (though  the
sprinkling  of  Montagnards  and  women is  more  typical  of  the
likewise  classic  "united  front"  picture).    And  they  have  one
remarkable  common  charateristic  which  thus  far  no  Saigon
government  has  been able  to  match:  they  are  all  from  soitih
of  the  seventeenth  parallel.
None   of   the   foregoing   justifies   Hanoi's   claim   that   the
N.L.F.   should  be   the   "sole   legitimate  voice   of   the   South
Vietnamese  people."    But  nothing justifies  the  opposite claim
either,  to  the  effect   that  without  Hanoi's  full   support,  the
N.L.F.  would  disappear   into  thin  air  like  a  desert  mirage.
There   can   indeed  be   no  quarrel  with   Carver's  statement
that  "the  Viet  Cong  organization  is  unquestionably  a  major
factor   in   the   South  Vietnamese   political   scene."    In  that
case,  however,  it  must  be  treated  as  what  it  is—a  political
force  in  South  Viet  Nam  which  cannot  be  simply  blasted off
the  surface  of  the  earth  with  B-52  saturation   raids,  or  told
to  pack  up  and  go  into  exile  to  North  Viet Nam.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  October 31,  1966
The  White   House  and  The  Tax  Lobbyists  Pull  Off  A  Coup  as  Congress  Adjourns
A  Collection of Tricky Tax  Steals  Plus A  Huge  Slush  Fund  for  LBJ
The  closing  hours  of  a  session  are  those  chosen  by lobbyists
and  their  friends  in  Congress  to  run  through   special  interest
legislation—most    notoriously   sugar    and    tax    bills—when
members  are  in  a  hurry  to  adjourn.    The   closing  hours  of
Congress  last  Saturday  were  no  exception.    The  only   differ-
ence   this   time:   the  biggest   lobbyist  of   all  was  the   White
House.     The   result   is  a  measure  which  will  give   Johnson
$30  to  $40  million  for  his  reelection  campaign   in  1968, in
addition  to  what  he  can  raise  from  private   sources.
A  Gore  and  Williams  Battle
Gore  of   Tennessee   and   Williams  of   Delaware   fought   a
last   minute   battle   in   an   effort   to   defeat   what   the   former
called  a  grab-bag   of  "stark  tax  favors"  and  "a  dangerous  in-
novation  in  the  use  of  public  money  for  political  campaigns."
The  vehicle  for  this  slick  series  of  raids  on  the  Treasury  was
a  bill  which  as  originally  passed  by  the  House  provided cer-
tain  tax  favors   to  encourage   foreign   investment  in   the U.S.
To  this  the  Senate  proceeded  to  attach  a  number  of  amend-
ments.      Several—which    provided-  a   humanitarian    smoke-
screen—were  an  effort  to  help  elderly  folk  meet  medical  and
other  expenses.     But  by  the  time  the  bill  emerged  from  con-
ference  committee  and  was  ready  for  final  passage  every  item
designed   to  help  the  elderly  had  been  traded  off  and  deleted
in  favor  of  special   interest  tax  legislation.    One  sample  was
an   obscure   technical  amendment   which  turned   out   to   give
$2  million  to   Harvey  Aluminum   Company;   three   members
of   the  Harvey  family  (Sen. Williams   disclosed)   belong   to
the  President's   $1,000  Club  and  the  company   itself   took  a
$15,000  ad  in  a  1965 Democratic  party  book.    Gore  opposed
this  provision,  though  Harvey  operates  in   Tennessee.
Another  sample  is  a  provision  which  will  enable   11  new
investment  funds  to  be  used  as  a  device  for  a  "swap"  of  some
$300,000,000  in  securities  without  paying capital  gains  taxes.
Another  will  give  depletion  allowances on  oyster  shells;  the
Treasury,  Williams  joked  bitterly,  might  as  logically  give  de-
pletion  allowances  on  oysters and  lobsters!    Another  gift  on
this  Christmas  tree  bill  would  double  the  tax  benefits  to  self-
A  Tax  Referendum  on  The  Vietnam  War?
"If  the  precedent  [of  allowing  income  tax  payers  to
check  off  $1  for  presidential  campaign expenses]  should
be  held  constitutional,  which  I  doubt,  then  it   would  be
a  dangerous  one  and, ere  long,  this  tax  form  which we
have  sought  to  simplify  would  have  a  number  of  boxes
on  it.    Suppose  we  had  a  box  giving  a  taxpayer  the
election  of  whether any  part  of  his  funds  could  be  used
in  the  Vietnam war?    There  are  a  number of  pacifists
in  this  country  who  stoutly  contend that  it  is  immoral
and  illegal  to  require  them  to  pay  taxes  to  support  a
war  which  is  contrary  to  their  religious or  moral  con-
cepts.     The  Senator  from   Vermont   [Aiken]   made  a
novel  suggestion,  that  the  way  to  end  the  Vietnam  war
was  for  the  Senate  to  pass  a  resolution declaring that
the  U.S. had  won the  war. ...  I  found  it  amusing,  as
I  am  sure  the  author did,  with  his  fine  sense  of humor,
but  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  humorous at  all  to  have
a  referendum  of  American taxpayers declaring whether
their  funds  should  be  used  in  the  Vietnam  war."
—Gore  (D. Tenn.)  in  the Senate  Oct. 22.
employed  professional  men; half  of  this  will  go  to   persons
with  incomes  over  $25,000.     All  these  special  tax  privileges
were  handed   out   on   the  eve  of   an   expected   sharp   rise  in
taxes  to  meet  the  growing  costs  of  the  Vietnamese war.
Gore  and  Williams  focused   their  fire  on  a  provision  which
allows  taxpayers  to  check  off  $1  each  on  their  income   taxes
to  finance  presidential  campaigns.    A  sum  equal  to  the  votes
cast   in  the  previous  presidential  election  minus  10,000,000
will  be  divided  equally  at  the  next  election  between  the  two
major  parties.     (Originally  minority  parties  which  polled  in
excess  of  1,500,000  votes  were  to  get  $1  for  each  vote  over
that  number,  but  in  conference this was  changed  to  5,000,000.
No  third  party  has  polled  that  big  a  vote;  even  La   Follette
in  1924  and  Teddy  Roosevelt  in  1912  fell  short  of  it.)   This
provision  is  expected  to  produce  anywhere  from  $60  to  $80
million.    Its  vague  terms will  enormously increase  the  power
of  the  President  to  succeed  himself  and  perhaps  to  name  his
successor.
We'll  B« Clod to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
Also  PLEASE  Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers   Urgent
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name         ..  ..  ..          . ...  ....   ..... .................. _ ....................
Street   ...........................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State.......
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name  .................................................................
Street   ...........................................................................
City  ....................................  Zip................  State.......
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted
Indicate    if   announcement   wished  D
1/31/66
Fifties
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington,  0. C.  200IS
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except   in   August,   the  last  week  in  December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;   $6   in   Canada;   {10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   »20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED