I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966feb07.pdf

============================================================

Voices  of  Protest  in  Congress, Pps. 2-3
Disclosing  The  Basic  Untruth  About  The  War  And Why  The  U.S.  Clings  To  It
"If.it  were  the  indigenous revolt,  the  Communists  say  it
is,  'the  United  States  would  have  no  business  taking  sides
in  the  conflict'."
—Washington  Post,  Jan.  31,  quoting  Under  Secretary  of
State  Ball's  defense   of  U.S.  policy  in  Evanston, III.,  Jan. SO.
"It  was  thus  by  its  home  policy  that  the  government of
the  South  finally  destroyed  the  confidence  of  the population,
which  it  had  won  during  the  early  years,  and  practically
drove  them  into  revolt  and desperation.  . .  . The insurrec-
tion  existed  before  the  Communists decided to take part....
They  were  simply  forced  to  join  in.  ...     And even  among
the  Communists,  the  initiative  did  not  originate  in  Hanoi,
but   from  the  grass  roots,  where  the  people  were  literally
driven  by  Diem  to  take  up  arms  in   self-defense."
—Philippe   Devillers,  in  North  Vietnam  Today,  edited  by
P.  J.  Honey  (China  Quarterly  and  Praeger,  1962).
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO. 5
FEBRUARY  7,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15   CENTS
Slow-Fuse   Sarajevo
In  one  frank  moment  during  four  hours  of  interrogation  by
the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  Jan.  28,  two   days
before  the  bombing of  North  Vietnam was  resumed, Secretary
Rusk  said,  "I  would  be  misleading you  if  I  told  you  that  I
know  where, when  and  how  this matter  [i.e.  the  war]  will be
resolved."     Where   the   way  ahead  is  so  murky,   caution  is
wise.   By this standard, the  resumption's timing—first  of  all—
is  questionable.  The  President  spoke  in  his  State  of  the  Union
message  Jan.  12  of  his  readiness  for   de-escalation.    "We'll  '
respond,"  he  said,  "if  others  reduce  their  use  of  force."    The
very  next day  at  a press  conference he  noted  a reduction in  the
number  of  military "incidents."   This  remark  was  followed  by
a  rash of  inspired  stories  from  the  Pentagon  and  the  State  De-
partment  disparaging  any  sign  of  a  lull.    During  the  Viet-
namese  New  Year  ("Tet")  truce,  Secretary Rusk  held  a  press
conference  (Jan.  20)   in  which  he  said  "There  is  every  sign
that  the  other  side  is  going  to  intensify  its  activity  after   the
Tet  period."     If  so  it  was  to  the  Administration's  advantage
to  let  the  Viet  Cong  demonstrate  to  public  opinion  at  home
and  abroad  that  the  enemy had  rejected the  suggestion  for  mu-
tual  de-escalation.
What  Was the   Hurry?
Instead  of  waiting  to  see,  we arranged  to  end  the  New  Year
truce  Jan.  23  six  hours  earlier  than  that  set  by  the  other  side.
We   resumed   offensive   operations  and  the   bombings  in   the
South  without  waiting  to  test  the  enemy's  intention.    It  was
as if  our military command feared  that maybe  the  enemy  might
continue  the  lull,  and  jumped  the  gun  six  hours  earlier  to
make  sure  that  the  war  resumed  with  vigor.    Ever  since  then
we  have  been  on  the  offensive;   the  enemy  has  been  hard  to
find.    On  the  eve of  the  resumed  bombing  of  the  North,  the
VC's  aggressive  action  had  been  limited  to  isolated   terrorist
and   harassing  attacks;  organized   units  of   the  North  Viet-
namese  regular  forces  seemed  to  have  vanished.     Roger  Hils-
man,  recently  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  Far  Eastern  Af-
fairs,  and  before  that  the  State  Department's  intelligence  chief,
told  the  House  subcommittee  on  Far  Eastern  Affairs   Feb.  1
"bombing  the  North  probably  makes  it  more  difficult  for  our
troops   rather  than  helping  them.    The   seven   regiments  of
North Vietnamese  regulars  came  South  after  the  bombing  and
2  *
Add  Phoney  Claims  of  A  Phoney  War
"There  are  some  35 countries  providing  assistance  to
[South]  Vietnam."
—Rusk  to  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Com. Jan.  28
"President  Johnson  and  Secretary  Rusk  are  whistling
in  the  dark  when they  express  hope  that  other   nations
will  help  the   U.S.  war   effort   to  any  extent  in  South
Vietnam.  . . . Only one government,  Nationalist   China,
wants  in  the  Vietnamese  fight  but  it  is  barred  for  ob-
vious  political  reasons. . . .  Both  the President  and  Mr.
Rusk  keep  referring  to  some  40  nations  who  are  con-
tributing:   But  such  statements  at  best  are  misleading.
A  study  of  the  list  and  their  contributions  shows  little
or  none  of  military  significance or  even  vital  non-mili-
tary  help.   In  fact,  only  31 nations  actually  have  made
some  kind  of  contribution.   Nine others  have  agreed  to
do  something  but  these  nine  include  such  flimsy  offers
as the Dominican Republic's  to supply  some  cement. .. .
Most  of  the  40  nations  constantly  referred   to  by  the
U.S.  as  'helpers'  come  up  with  only  token   offerings."
—R. H. Shackford,   Wash. Daily News,  Jan. 26
there  is  evidence  they  pulled  back  at  least  into  the  mountains
during  the  bombing  pause—which  may be  a  signal."    Should
we  not  have  waited  to  see  the  meaning  of  this  before  resum-
ing  the  bombing?
A  second  question  arises  about  the  timing.    If  our   appeal
to  the  United  Nations  was  meant  seriously,  why  did  we  have
to  make  its  task  harder  by  first  resuming  the  bombing  of  the
North  and  then  appealing  to  the  UN?     Except  for   Nation-
alist  China,  there  was  not  a  single  U.S.  ally,  much  less "the
neutrals,   which   did  not   regret   the   resumption;   so  did   the
Vatican.    The  Administration  in  announcing  the   resumption
created  the  impression  that  the  other   side  had  used  the  lull
for   so  great   a  build-up  as  to  endanger  our  troops.    But  if
carefully   read,  parallel  stories  on  Feb.   1  from  Pentagon   re-
porters,  obviously  the  fruit  of  one  of  those  not-for-attribution
military  intelligence  briefings, do  not  bear  out  this  impression.
"These  sources,"  Henry  L. Trewhitt  reported  in  the  Baltimore
Sun  that  day,  "held  that  North  Vietnam  had  not  gained  any
military  advantage  from  the  suspension."    John  G.  Norris  in
the  Washington  Post  noted  in  his  account  of  the  briefing  that
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  7,1966
From the Interrogations of Secretary Rusk Jan. 28 by Senate Foreign Relations...
Sen.  CHURCH:   If  this  is  the  philosophy   underlying  our
policy,   Mr.   Secretary,   I  should   have  thought  that   it  would
have  been   difficult   to  have  ever  fought   a  Civil  War   in  this
country  had  the  same  principles  obtained  a  century  ago>   At
that  time,  I  suppose  the  Southerners  felt  that  there  had  been
an  invasion  of  the  South  from  the  North,  and  had  England,
which  favored  the  South,  adhered  to  the  same  principle  that
now  seems  to  govern   American  policy,  and  had   sent   troops
in  the   name  of   self-determination  into  the   Confederacy,   I
think  they  would  have  been  hard  put  to  convince  Abraham
Lincoln  that  there  should  have  been  an  election  to  determine
the  ultimate  outcome  of  the war .  . .
Now   in   Vietnam   you  can   look   at   the   war   as  a   covert
invasion  of  the  South  by  the  North  or  you  can  look  at  it  as
some   other   scholars   do,   as  basically  an   indigenous  war   to
which  the  North  has  given  a  growing  measure  of  aid  and
abetment,  but  either  way  you  look  at  it,  it  is  a  war  between
Vietnamese  to  determine  what  the  ultimate  kind  of   govern-
ment  is  going  to  be  for  Vietnam.    When  I  went  to  school
that  was  a  civil  war.
Secretary  RUSK:  Well,  Senator,  I  do  not  follow  that  point
at  all  because  whatever   you  call  it,  there  is  aggression   from
North   Vietnam   against   South   across   that   demarcation   line
contrary  to  the  military  clauses  of  that   1954   commitment.
Sen.  CHURCH:'  Have all  the  provisions  of  the  1954  agree-
ment  been  adhered  to  on  either  side?
Secretary  RUSK:   No,  they  have  not.
Sen.  CHURCH:   Were  the  elections  which  were  called  for
at  the  time  that  agreement  was  made,  were  they  held?
Secretary RUSK:   Neither  in  North  or  South  Vietnam.
Sen.  CHURCH:   Right.   So it  cannot  be  said  that  violations
of  the  agreement  have  been  all  one-sided.
Secretary  RUSK:   That  is correct ...
The  CHAIRMAN  (Fulbright):   May I  ask in  that  connec-
tion,  what  is  the  explanation  of  why  in   1956,   in  pursuance
of  the  Geneva  accords,   elections   were  not  held? ...  He
[Diem],  I  am  informed,  1S'55,  in  accordance  with  the  treaty,
he  was  requested  to  consult   about   elections,  and  he   refused
to  do  so,  is  that  correct?
Secretary   RUSK:   Well,  neither  his  government  nor   the
government  of the U.S.  signed  that  agreement  . . .
The  CHAIRMAN:   Why  in  your  opinion  didn't  we  sign
it?  ...
Secretary  RUSK:   My  general  impression  is  that  the   U.S.
was  at  that  time  not  persuaded  that  this  was  the   best  way
to  settle  this  affair  .  . .
The  CHAIRMAN:    Not  having  signed  it,  what  business
Why  Take  Chances?
"Defense   Department  officials   [after  denying  burial
in  Arlington to  the  remains of  Communist leader Rob-
ert  G. Thompson,  who  fought  against  Fascism  in  Spain
and  later  won  a  Distinguished  Service  Cross  in  World
War  II]   disclosed  today   that  they,  have  tightened  up
regulations  covering  national  cemeteries  so  that  per-
sons   convicted   under   subversive  activities  legislation
cannot  be  buried  there,  even  if  their  sentences  are  for
less  than  five  years.    Lt.  Col.  Douglas  C. Jones,  a  staff
assistant    to   Arthur   Sylvester,   Defense   Department
spokesman,  said  'as  far  as  we  know,  no  known  Com-
munists  are  buried  at   Arlington'."
—New  York  Times, Jan. 28
Isn't  there  any  way  to  dig  them  up  and  be  sure?
was  it  of  ours  for  intervening  .  .  .?
Secretary  RUSK:   Well,  the  prospect   of  free  elections   in
North  and  South  Vietnam  was  very  poor  at  the  time.
The   CHAIRMAN:    Now,   they   have   always   been   poor,
and  will  be  for  a  hundred  years,  won't  they?   That  was  not
news  to  you.   I  mean  this  was  a  device  to  get  around   the
settlement,  was  it  not?
Secretary  RUSK:   No,  no,  Mr.  Chairman.   I  do  not  believe
the  prospect  of  free  elections  in  South  Vietnam  anyhow  are
all  that  dim.   *    *    *
Senator  CHURCH:   It  seems  to  me  ...      that  the  under-
developed   world  is  going  to   be  beset   with   guerrilla   wars
regardless   of  the  outcome   in  Vietnam,  and  we  will  have  to
live  in  a  world   afflicted   with  revolutions  for  a  long  time  to
come.   That  is  why  it  is so  important  to  try to determine  what
our  basic  foreign   policy  is  going   to  be  as  it  grapples  with
these  revolutionary wars  in  many  parts  of  the  under-developed
world  in  the  future;  and,  as  I  have  listened  to  your  explana-
tions  this morning,  I  gather  that  wherever  a  revolution  occurs
against   an   established   government,   and   that   revolution,   as
most  will  doubtlessly  be,  will  be  infiltrated  with Communists,
that  the  United  States  regards  it  (as)   in  its  interest  to  prevent
the  success  of  Communist   uprising.   This,  at  least,  has  been
the  policy  we  followed   in  the  Dominican  Republic  and   in
Vietnam.   I  wonder  whether  this  is  going  to  continue  to  be
the  policy  as  we  face  new  guerrilla  wars  in  the  future?
Secretary  RUSK:   Senator,  I  think  it  is  very  important  that
the  different  kinds  of  revolution  be  distinguished.   We  are  in
no  sense  committed  against  change.   As  a  matter  of  fact,  we
are  ourselves  stimulating very  sweeping  revolutions  in  a  good
many  places.   The  whole  weight  and  effort  of  the  Alliance  for
Progress  is to bring about  far-reaching  social-economic  changes.
From  the  Two  Anti-War  Speeches  in  the  House the  Day  the  Bombs Began to  Fall Again
BROWN  (D.,  Cal.):  "From  all  sides  we  hear  it  said  the
pause   was   a   failure—the  other  side   is  not   interested  in
peace.    I  do  not  wish  to  debate the  point  at  this  time.   But
those  who  are  honest will  admit  that  the  previous 11 months
of  bombing  was  a  failure.    That  11-month  period  saw  the
U.S.  forced  to  multiply  its  ground forces  many  times over
merely  to   hold   its  own  in  South  Vietnam.  .  .  .  That  11
months  saw  a  strengthening of  the  will  to  resist   in  North
Vietnam. ...  To  resume the  bombing, after  this  11 months
of  failure  to  achieve any  constructive results,  demonstrates
again  and  more  forcefully  the  sterility of  the  U.S.  position
in  Vietnam. .  .  .  We  will  weaken  democracy and strengthen
the  totalitarian  tendencies of  our own  society. ...  I  think
that  he  (the  President)  has  made  a  tragic mistake."
WOLFF  (D.,  N.Y.):  "The  acknowledgement  that  all  our
efforts  toward  peace  have  been  of  no  avail  and  that  a  re-
sumption  of  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  has  been  or-
dered,  is  a  serious  blow  to  those  of  us  who  have  urged  an
exhaustive  exploration of  every possible  chance for negotia-
tions.    Let  us  hope ...  all  parties  to  the  war—Peiping,
Hanoi,  the  National  Liberation  Front  and  South  Vietnam—
are  brought  to  the  peace  table."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February   7,1966
... How Far Do We Plan to Go in Policing World Against Popular Revolutions?
Sen.   CHURCH:    That   is  change,  Mr.   Secretary,   without
violence.   History  shows  the  most  significant change  has  been
accompanied  by  violence.   So  you  think  that  with  the  Foreign
Aid   program   we  are  going  to  be  able,  with  our  money,   to
avert  serious  uprisings  in  many  of  these  destitute  countries   in
future  years ?
Secretary  RUSK:   Not   necessarily  avert  all  of  them,  but  I
do  believe  there  is  a  fundamental  difference  between   the  kind
of  revolution which  the  Communists  call their  wars  of  national
liberation,  and  the  kind  of  revolution  which   is  congenial  to
our  own  experience,  and  fits  into  the  aspirations  of  ordinary
men  and  women   right   around  the  world.   There  is   nothing
liberal  about  that  revolution  that  they  are  trying  to  push  from
Peiping.   This  is  a  harsh,  totalitarian  regime.    It  has  nothing
in  common  with  the  American  revolutionary  tradition,  nothing
in  common  with  it.
Sen.  CHURCH:   The  objectives  of  the  Communist  revolu-
tion   are   very   different   indeed   from   the   objectives   of   our
own.   But  objectives  of  revolutions  have  varied  through   the
centuries.    The   question   which  I  think  faces  this  country  is
how  we  can  best  cope  with  the  phenomena   of   revolt   in  the
underdeveloped   world   in  the  years  ahead,  and   I  have   very
serious  doubts  that  American  intervention  with  military  power
will  often  be  the  proper   decision,  and  that  too  much  inter-
vention  may  well  spread  Communism  throughout   this  part  of
the  world  rather  than  thwart  it  ...    I  cannot  remember  many
revolutions  that  have  been  fought  in  splendid  isolation.   There
were  as  many  Frenchmen   at  Yorktown  when  Cornwallis  sur-
rendered   as  there  were  American  Continentals.    Senator   Pell
Like  Lighting  A  Cigar  With  A  $100  Bill
"Despite  lack  of  publicly disclosed  convincing  results
on  their  strikes  against  the  matted,  deeply-entrenched
jungle  hideouts  of  the  enemy,  the  B-52s  are  going  to
step  up  their  efforts from  their  far-away base  in  Guam.
A  half  billion  dollars  has  been  earmarked  for  this  op-
eration  for  the  next  fiscal  year,  according  to  Washing-
ton  reports  of   budget   requests."
—Jack    Fffisie,     Los   Angeles   Times,  in    Washington
Post,  Jan.  26.
tells  me  more.   I  accept  the  correction.   In  any  case,  it  seems
to  me  that  the  Communists   have  not  changed   the   rules  of
revolution   by  meddling   in   them,   and   the   question   is   not
whether  we  approve  or  disapprove  of  them.   When  we  were
an  infant  nation,  we  stood  up  for  the  right  of  revolution   and
.  .  .  what  I  am  worried  about,  Mr.  Secretary,  is  this:   That
where  we  intervene  too  much  in  wars  of  this  type,  our  policy
may  well  turn  out  to  be  self-defeating.
Secretary  RUSK:   May turn  out to be what?
Sen.  CHURCH:   Self-defeating.
Sen.  CHURCH:  I  think  that  in  areas  where  sensitivity  to
Western  imperialism,   borne  of  three  centuries  of  colonialism,
is  so very great,  that  Mao  Tse-tung  might  want  us  to  move  in
massively  with  Western  troops  from  the  opposite   side  of  the
world,    believing    that    this    intervention    serves   the    larger
interests  of  China  in  Asia,  and  tends  to  spread   Communism
by  identifying  Communism   with   nationalism,   and   our   own
policy  with  the  hated  Western  imperialism.
Voices  of  Protest,  Disquiet and Warning in  the  Senate  Jan.  31  When  Bombing Resumed
AIKEN  (B.  Vt):  "There  may  be  a  chance  that  a  world
nuclear  war  can  be  avoided  .  .  .  that  we  may  escape  the
devastating  effect  of  a  general  land  war  in  Asia,  the  kind
of  war  we  are  least  likely  to  win  .  .  .   [but]   we  must  be
prepared  for the worst. ... I  believe the  President  has erred
in  taking  new  steps  which  may  lead  to  a  cataclysmic  world
conflict.  I  well  recall  Gen. Ridgway telling  me  after  a  hear-
ing  one  day  that  if  we  sent  2,000,000  men  into  the  Vietnam
area,  they  would  be  swallowed  up."
MANSFIELD  (D.  Mont.):  "I  should  like  to  read  a  brief
comment  made by  General Ridgway when he  was command-
er  of  the  8th  Army in  Korea at  the  time  the  truce  negotia-
tions  were  underway.   The   American  people  must  realize
the  need  for  infinite  patience. ...  In  the  world of  today  we
must  maintain an  equilibrium  of  forces  so  that  none  of  them
become  destructive.    A   modus  vivendi  must  be  found  for
people  who  were  put  on  earth  to  live,  and  a  way  must  be
found  to  enable  them  to  exist   side  by  side  without  being
at  one  another's  throats'."
MORSE  (D.,  Ore.):  "I  do  not  believe  escalating  the  war
will  produce  peace.  .  .  .  We  should  face  the  fact  that  hu-
manity  cannot  survive  another  world war.  .  .  .  The  proposal
to  take  it  to  the  Security  Council  comes  at  least   2</
z
  years
late.   It  is  extremely  unfortunate  that  at  the  same  time  he
has  renewed  the  air  raids  on  North  Vietnam,  for  this  will
make  it  far  more  difficult  for  the  UN."
YOUNG  (R.,  N.D.):  "With  our  limited  resources,  both  in
manpower  and  financially,  we  should  not  be  picking  out  an
area  to  fight  the  Communists  where  they  have  all  the  ad-
vantages  and  we  all  the  disadvantages,  as  in  Vietnam."
COOPER  (R.,  Ky.):  "I  am  one  of  those  who  believe  that
the  bombing should  not  have  been  resumed—at  least  for  the
present. ...  We should  support  him  [the  President]  in his
efforts  to  secure  action  by  the  United  Nations."
GORE  (D.,  Tenn.):  "There  are  many  voices  in  Washing-
ton  today  who  say   that  it  would  be  easier   to  knock  out
China  now than it  would be  10 years  from  today. ...  I  was
in  Congress  after  the  end  of   World  War  II,  and  I  heard
voices  giving  the  same  message,  from  the  identical  sources
from  which  I  hear  them  now.    It  will  be  better,  they  then
said,  to  knock  out  Russia  now  than  to  wait  until  she  has
nuclear  weapons.    Fortunately  we  did  not  follow  the  advice
of  preventive  war  then.    There  has  been  some  rapproche-
ment;  we are not now threatening  to destroy  each  other. . . .
If  the  extremists  do  not  prevail, there  is  yet  hope  for  man-
kind."
CLARK  (D.,  Pa.) :"Resumption  of  the  bombing  of  North
Vietnam   and   escalation    of    the   war   in   South   Vietnam
through  a  policy  of  search  and  destroy  makes  the  achieve-
ment  of  these  major  objectives  of  our foreign  policy   [peace-
ful   co-existence,   an  end  to  wars  of  national  liberation,  a
solution  to  the  German problem,  a  non-proliferation treaty,
a  test  ban  treaty,  a  stay  on  the  deployment  of  anti-missile
missiles,  and  meaningful  progress   on  disarmament"]   diffi-
cult  if  not  impossible."
KENNEDY  (D., N.Y.):  "Our  objectives  in Vietnam can be
gained  only  by  what  we  do  in  the  South ...  to  show  the
people  of  that  unhappy land ... that  the defeat  of  the Viet-
cong  will  lead  to  a  better  life  for  themselves. ...  If  we
regard  bombing  as  the  answer  in  Vietnam—we  are  headed
straight  for  disaster.    In  the  past  bombing  has  not  proved
a  decisive  weapon  against   a  rural  economy—or  against  a
guerrilla  army.  .  .  .  The  danger  is  that  the  decision  to  re-
sume  may  become  the  first  in  a  series  of  steps  on  a  road
from  which  there  is  no  turning  back—a   road  which  leads
to  catastrophe  for  all  mankind."
2  :
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February   7,1966
The  Terrible  Meaning  of  McNamara's  Request  for  More  Ammunition
(Continued   from   Page   One)
"officials   believe  there  was  increased   infiltration   of  men   and
supplies  during  the  bombing  pause,  but  the  figures  they  cited
do  not  clearly  demonstrate  this."    He  said  their  estimates  of
enemy  numbers  after  the  37-day-pause  was  "about   the  same
estimate"  given  Senator  Mansfield  in  Vietnam  last  Fall   and
embodied  in  the  report  he  submitted   in  December.    "Nor,"
Norris  added,  "has  there  been  any  significant  recent  increase
in  anti-aircraft  missiles  and  guns  in  North   Vietnam,  it  was
said."    The  best  that  came  out  of  this  briefing  from  the  Ad-
ministration's  point  of  view was that  "This  assessment  fits  into
earlier  reports,"  as Trewhitt  noted,  "that  a  longer  pause  would
begin  to  reflect  military  disadvantage  for  the  South."     (Our
italics).    But  what  of  the  military disadvantage—and  the  in-
creased   loss   of   American   lives—if   resumption   of   bombing
leads  the  North  and  the  Viet  Cong,  as  it  did  last  year,  to raise
the  level  of  the   fighting?
How  LBJ  Plays  Peking's  Game
The  available  evidence  indicates  that  we  used  the  lull  and
the   truce   to   ease  our   own   supply   problems   and   build   up
strength   for   a  renewed   push   forward.   The   peace  offensive
and   the   appeal   to   the   UN   are  only   a   cover   for   our.  own
expansion  and  escalation   of  the  war.   But  again,   even  from
the  point  of  view  of  those  in  the  Administration who  want  a
military  victory  in  Vietnam,  its  conduct   is  clumsy  and   self-
defeating.     It  bears  all  the  earmarks  of  hasty  improvisation
to  give  "a  little  something  to  everybody."   What  we  mean  by
self-defeating   is  this:   A   major   objective  of   China's   policy
is  to  avoid  its  isolation  in  a  confrontation  with  the  U.S.    A
major  objective  of  U.S.  policy  was  to  isolate  China  by  widen-
ing  the  split  between  Peking   and   Moscow.    This  was  why
the  President  in  his  State  of  the  Union   message   called   for
an  easing  of  restrictions   on  our  trade  with  Eastern   Europe.
It  does  not  make  sense  to  woo  Russia  and  then  a  few  weeks
later  put  the  Russians  on  the  spot  by  a  last  minute  appeal  to
the   UN.    Publicly   Moscow   cannot  urge  Hanoi  to   negotiate
without  exposing  itself  to  charges  of  collusion  from   Peking.
A   public  debate  at   the   UN   must  widen  the   gap   between
Blacked  Out  in  the  U.S.  Press
Rising  Roman  Catholic  opposition   in  South  Vietnam
to  continuance  of  the  war  has  yet  to  be  reported  in  the
U.S.   press.    In  Paris  the  pro-American  Le  Figaro  in
its  Jan.  8-9  issue  carried  a  French   agency   press  dis-
patch  from  Saigon  saying  that  11  Vietnamese   Catholic
priests   had  just  issued  a  manifesto   appealing   to  au-
thorities  of   both   the   North   and  South   "to  end  this
fratricidal  war."    The  priests  said,   "The  state  of  dis-
order  created  by  the  war  with  the  presence   of  foreign
troops  has  put  the  masses  in  economic,  social  and  moral
conditions   unworthy  of   men."     The   London  Observer
(Jan.  23)  also  quotes  a  statement  issued  by  the  Roman
Catholic  Archbishop  of  Saigon  Jan.  12  condemning  the
"political   vacuum"  in   the   South.     The   Government,"
the   Archbishop  protested,  "is  still   unable  to  create   a
firm  legal  foundation  or  obtain  the  support  of  the  peo-
ple.    This  is  a   most   serious  obstacle   in  the   path   to
peace."  Why does  none  of  this  appear  in the  U.S.  press?
Moscow  and  Washington.    To  that  extent  it  serves  Peking's
purpose,   which   is  to   block   a   Russo-American  detente   and
force  a  Russo-American confrontation  over  Vietnam.   If  war
comes,  Peking   does  not  wish  to  face  it  alone.   Hilsman   in
his  Feb.  1 testimony  expressed  the  view  that  we  were  headed
for  war  with  China,  and  that  if  the  war  resulted  from  U.S.
escalation  Moscow  would  come  to  Peking's  aid  "and,"  he  said,
"with  nuclear  weapons  if  necessary."
The   course  on  which  we  are  embarked  will  also  be  self-
defeating   in  the  South.    Secretary  McNamara,  in  explaining
to  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  why  the  Administra-
tion  was asking $4.1  billion  for  ammunition  alone  in  the fiscal
year  ending  this  June   30,  said  the  purpose   was  "a  massive
application  of  firepower  to  enhance  the   effectiveness  of   our
forces  and  reduce  casualties."   At  the  December  rate  (as  Don
Oberdorfer  pointed  out  in  the  Chicago  Daily  News  Jan.  22)
we  will  be  dropping  more  bombs  on  Vietnam  this  fiscal  year
(480,000  tons)  than  we  did  on  Korea  (418,000  tons)  in  the
three  years  of  that  conflict  and  more  than  two-thirds  as  much
as  the  U.S.   Air   Force   in  the  entire  Pacific  Theatre  in  four
years  of  World  War  II  .(650,000  tons).   This  is  no  way  to
win  the  people.   It  is  not  pacification.  It  is  genocide.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
2/7/66
For  the  enclosed   15  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted  FUtiet
Indicate  if  announcement   wished  O
IF. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and  the
firit   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:     $6  in   Canada;   110   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
SIC  to  Europe;   S20  to  Israel,  Amia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED