I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966feb28.pdf

============================================================

Text  of  Kennedy's  Peace Initiative,  Pps.  3-4
If  Russia  Survived  A  Backdown  Over  Cuba,  We  Can  Survive  A  Backdown  in  Vietnam
"I  do  not   think  that   this   dispute   here   is   worthy   of
an   escalation   that   would   result   in   a   confrontation    with
China  in  a  world  war.    I  do  not  believe  there  is  much  evi-
dence  that  this  is  the  kind  of  a  test  that  if  we  should   make
a  compromise,   that  then  all  the  world  will  collapse  because
we  have   been  defeated.     This  country   is  much  too  strong
in  my  opinion  that  it  would  suffer  any  great  setback.    We
are   much   stronger   than   Russia   was   when   she   withdrew
from  Cuba.    Within  a  week  people  said  she  had  had  a  re-
buff  and  within  a  month  everyone   was  complimenting-  them
for  having  contributed  to  the  maintenance   of  peace."
—Fulbright   to  Rusk:  Foreign  Relations  hearing  Feb.  18.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  8FEBRUARY  28,  1966
'<"       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.
15  CENTS
Kennedy's  Quiet  Realism  vs. LBJ's  Stale  Myths
So  far  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  has  done  a
disappointing  job.    To  study  the  record  of  the  Vietnam  hear-
ings  is  to  see  how  poorly  informed  its  members  are.     They
gave  expression  to  the  growing  disquiet  about  the  war.    But
they  failed  to  meet  the   central  issues.    Secretary  Rusk  was
allowed  without  effective  .challenge  to  repeat  the  stale  myth
that  this  is  primarily  a  foreign  invasion,  the  Viet  Cong   the
mere  tools  of  a  foreign  invader.    This  mythology  blocks  the
road   to  peace.     A  vast  literature  has  grown   up   about   the
Vietnamese  war  since  we  took  over  control  from  the  French
12  years  ago;  most  of  the  writers,  American  or  foreign,  see
the   roots   of  the  war  in  an  indigenous  rebellion   and   a  di-
vided  country.    But  these  Senators  seem  to  have  read   little
of  it.    The  most  striking evidence  of  their  failure  to  do  their
homework  was  the  almost  total   absence  of  questions   about
the  central  issue  of  the  conflict,  as  it  appears  to  the  peasantry,
the  people  most  concerned.    That   is  the  land  question.
The  "Stab  in  the  Back"  Legend
To   read  the  transcript  carefully   is  to  see  the  advantages
which  the  bureaucracy has  over  committees  supposed  to  super-
vise  it.    A  little  army of-experts,  intelligence  men  and  skilled
propagandists  prepare  the  case  for  the  Administration  while
the  public  interest  is  left  to  a  handful  of  Senators  busy  with
a   multitude  of   other   matters.     Propagandistic   time-bombs
were  planted  in  the  government's  presentation.    An  example
was  General  Taylor's  remark  in  his  prepared   statement  that
the  Communists  "have  not  forgotten  that  the  Viet  Minh  won
more  in  Paris  than  in  Dien   Bien  Phu  and  believe  that  the
Viet  Cong  may  be  as  fortunate  in  Washington."    This  was
a  dirty  dig  not  only  at  democratic  debate  but  at  the   whole
idea  of  civilian  control,   a  new  variant  of  the   "stab   in   the
back"  legend  with  which  the  German  military  caste  excused
its  failure  in  the  first  World  War   and  paved   the  way  for
Hitler's   overthrow   of   the   German   Republic.     Democracy
was  smeared  as  the  cause  of  Germany's  defeat.
This  line,  which   reflects  Johnson's  anger  with  his  critics,
holds  great  danger  for  the  future.    It  was  the  cry of  the mili-
tary  conspirators  who  tried  to assassinate  de  Gaulle  and  over-
throw  the  French  Republic  after  he  withdrew  from   Algeria.
It  recalls the  McCarthy  period's  No.  1 canard—that  we  "lost"
China  because  of  Communists  in  the  State  Department.     It
ought  to  be  stepped  on  hard.    But  only  Senator  Aiken  really
3
Or By  A  Quiet Majority  Either
Sen.  SPARKMAN:  Do  you  believe  there  has   been
some  growth  in  the  stability  of  the  government?
Gen.   TAYLOR:  Almost  anything  would  be  an  im-
provement  over  what  I  saw  while  I  was  Ambassador.
I  had  to  work  with five Prime  Ministers  in  the  course
of   my  13  months.    Since  this  present   government  is
now  in  its   8th  month,  clearly   it   has   done  better   in
terms  of  stability   than  any  government  since  that  of
President  Diem. . . . This  is the first government which
is  solidly  backed  by  the  armed  forces,  and  as  long  as
they  are  behind  this  government  in  the  present   sense
it  is  not  going  to  be overturned by  some noisy  minority.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Comm.  hearing  Feb.  17.
grappled   with   it.     He   asked   General   Taylor   whether   he
thought   France  "would   have  won  the  war  had   it  not   been
for  the  weakening  will  in  Paris."    "I  doubt  it,  Senator,"  Gen-
eral   Taylor   admitted,   "but   I   think   they  could   have   lasted
longer  and  could  have  had  better  terms."    But  were  not  the
people  of  France  right  to  see  that  their  sons  were  being  lost
in  a  hopeless  and  unworthy cause?
Gen.   Taylor   knows  better   than  most  men  that  the  Viet-
namese  war  was  no  simple  Communist  plot  or  foreign  inva-
sion.    The   Senate  Foreign   Relations  Committee   could   have
elicited  a  great  deal  from  him  that  the  State  Department  tries
to  hide.    But  it  didn't  know  enough  to  ask  the  right  ques-
tions.     It   should   have   inquired   into  the   report   on   South
Vietnam  he  made  to  President   Kennedy  in   1961,   the  year
we  began  to  escalate  our  military  involvement.     The  gist  of
what   Taylor   had   to   say  was  widely  reported   at   the   time.
"After  his  tour  in  October,"   Newsweek   said  Dec.   18,   1961,
"Gen.  Taylor  decided  that  drastic  reforms  were  needed.  . . the
elections  next  August  must  be  fair,   and  all   non-Communist
political  prisoners  should  be  released."   Sorenson  in  his  book
on  Kennedy  says  Taylor   reported  "that  Diem's  own  lack  of
popularity  in  the  countryside  was  handicapping   anti-guerrilla
efforts."     But  the   effort   to   impose   social   and   economic   re-
form   as  the  price  of  U.S.   aid  failed.    We  have  been   sup-
porting   military   dictatorship   in   South   Vietnam   ever   since
while   pretending   that  we  were  defending    freedom.
One  of  the   reasons  pressure   for   economic   and   social   re-
form  failed  at  that  time  is  because  of  the  visit  Lyndon  John-
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  28,1966
Johnson  Made  the  Same  Mistake  With  Diem  As  With  Ky
(Continued  from   Page  One)
son  paid  to  Saigon  in  the  spring  of  1961,  six  months before
Taylor's  mission.   This  is  discussed in  Robert  Shaplen's  new
book,  "The  Lost Revolution."   Its  theme is  summarized  in  its
subtitle,  "The   Story  of  Twenty  Years  of  Neglected   Oppor-
tunities  in  Vietnam and  of  America's  Failure  to  Foster  De-
mocracy  There."    The   spring  of   1961  was  when  Johnson
laid  the  flattery  on  with  a  shovel,  calling Diem  the  Churchill
of  Asia.   "The  effect  of  Johnson's  visit"  and  the  promises  of
support  he  gave  Diem,  Shaplen  writes,  "was  to  stiffen   the
resistance  of  the  Vietnamese"  to  the   reforms  the  U.S.  had
long  been  urging  upon  them.   "After  Johnson  left,"  Shaplen
says,   "the   Vietnamese  would  no  longer  even  discuss  these
matters."     Shaplen  writes  from   long  experience  in  the  Far
East,  principally  for  The  New  Yorker.    "For  those  of  us  who
had  been  in  China  in  1946,"  he  comments  on  the  Johnson
visit,  "and  followed the  efforts  of  the  Americans to get  Chiang
Kai-shek  to adopt  certain reforms, the  comparison was marked.
Every  time  we  had  thought  we  were  getting  somewhere  with
Chiang ... we did certain things  (such  as selling  China  huge
amounts  of  surplus  war  property  at  a  crucial  moment)   that
enabled  the  more  reactionary elements  around  Chiang  to  con-
vince  him  that  he  didn't  have  to  execute  any  of  the  reforms
the  Americans  desjred   because  we  had  made  clear  our  de-
termination  to  go  on helping  him  in  the  war  against  the  Com-
munists  anyway."   The  Ky  crowd  may feel  as cynically secure
after  the  similar  razzle-dazzle  treatment  Johnson  gave  them
in   Honolulu.
Humphrey's  Strident  Nonsense
The  State  Department  has widely  sold  the  line  in  Congress
that  we  ought  to  "forget  about  history"  and  consider  what  to
do  now.    But  to  forget  about  history  is  to  accept  the  State
A  Somewhat  Academic  Question
Sen.   LONG:  General,  I  don't   have  the  good   fortune
to  have  a  son.    I  have  two  daughters   of  whom  I  am
very  proud.    But  if  I  had  a  son  and  he  died  in  Viet-
nam,  would  you  feel   that  boy  died  in  vain?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  No,   sir.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Comm.  hearing  Feb.  17.
Department's  version   and  to   accept  its  version   is  to  make
negotiations  impossible.    For  what  our  government  has  done
is  very  simple.    It  began  by  recognizing  the  popular  discon-
tent  which  brought  on  the  rebellion.    But  when  it  could  not
get  reform to  end  the  discontent,  it  began  to  pretend  that  the
discontent  did  not  exist,  that  this  was  just  another  form  of
aggression  run  from  Hanoi.    But  if  this  is  merely  aggression
from  Hanoi,  why  should  aggression  be  rewarded?    What  is
there  to  negotiate but  withdrawal of  "Hanoi's  troops"?    And
if  this  is  aggression  from  Hanoi,  then  the  National Liberation
Front  and  the  Viet  Cong  are  its  tools  in  aggression.    How
can  one  reward  them  by  a  place  in  the  future  government  of
South   Vietnam?    What   honorable  end  but   their  uncondi-
tional  surrender?    This  is  the  dead  end  into  which  the  gov-
ernment's  falsifications  have  led  it.    Until  the  origins  of  the
war  are  re-examined,  as  they  should  be  re-examined  in  full
public  hearings  by  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,
we  cannot  find  our  way to  a  peaceful  settlement  and  we  shall
have  such  strident   nonsense  as  Vice  President   Humphrey's
talk  about  "putting  a  fox  in  a  chicken  coop ...  an  arsonist
in  a  fire  department"  in  reply to  Senator  Robert  F.  Kennedy's
initiative  on  the  war.
The  difference  between  Senator  Kennedy  and  the  Adminis-
tration  is  not  a  mere  difference   on  timing  or  strategy—on
(Continued  on  Page  Five)
The  Wall  St.   Journal   Wonders   Whether   LBJ  Knows  What   He's   Doing
With  all   due  respect   for   the  Administration's   military
problems,   we  imagine   a  lot   of   people   around   the   world
must   find   its   diplomatic   country-hopping   an   unedifying
spectacle. ...  It  suggests  the substitution  of  frantic   action
for  calm   thought   about  Vietnam.
The  Asian   tour   Vice  President   Humphrey  is   presently
taking  may  have  some  public  relations  purpose,  but  it  was
so  hastily   contrived   in  such   an  atmosphere   of   confusion
that  it  is  hard to believe  it  will  advance  either  the  war effort
or  the  cause  of  peace.    The  same  goes  for  the  spur-of-the-
moment   Honolulu  conference   and  the   scurrying   about   of
the  envoys  earlier  this   year.
The  U.S.  performance  in  the  UN  Security   Council  must
also  appear  an  oddity  to  many  eyes.    After  long   ignoring
the  Council  as  a  forum on  Vietnam,  the  Administration  sud-
denly  took  the  issue   to  it,  and  just  as  suddenly  seems  to
have  lost   interest   in  seriously   pressing   for  action  there.
The  whole  thing  adds  up  to  an  impression   of  impulsive-
ness  and  amateurishness  in  international  relations.    While
the  activity  may  be  telling   the   world  we  want   peace,   it
could  be  announcing  as  well  that  we  don't  know  quite  what
we're  doing  to  Vietnam,  in  view  of  the  evident  eagerness
to  get  out  of  it  by  almost  any  avenue.
Where,  in  all  the  thrashing  about,  is  the  opportunity  for
the  deep  reflection the  war  urgently  demands?    It  might  be
argued  that  the  length  of  America's  involvement   in  Viet-
nam  has  provided ample  time  for  every  conceivable  analysis
of  strategies,  objectives  and  probabilities.     If    BO,  there   is
little  evidence  the  time  has  been  effectively  employed.  .  .  .
This  background  makes  the  prospect  of  a  major  new  ex-
pansion  an  especially  disquieting   one.    Whether  or  not  you
agree  with  retired  General  Gavin  and  former  Ambassador
Kennan,   they   have   a   point   in   contending    that   the    U.S.
should   hold  where  it  is  until  it  can  decide   what  it  wants
to  do.    Some  disadvantages  of   expansion   have   been   well
rehearsed   by   now—the   mounting   risk   of   war   with   Red
China,  the  diminishing  ability  to  handle  troubles  that  may
erupt  elsewhere.    In  addition,  it  seems  to  us  there  are  dis-
advantages  pertaining  to  Vietnam  alone.
Since   the  Communists   have  thus   far   matched   or   over-
matched  each  American  force  build-up,  they  are  presumably
capable  of  continuing  to  do  so.    In  that  event,  it  becomes
more  difficult   than  ever  to  see  how  this  war  can  be  won,
either  in  the  sense  of  clear-cut   victory  or  in  the   limited
sense  of  causing  the  Communists  to  cease  fire  and  come  to
the  conference  table.
Moreover,   if   the   war  within  Vietnam  gets  bigger  and
bigger  and  goes  on  and  on,  the  likelihood  grows  that  there
may  not  be  any  Vietnam  left  worth  anyone's  having.    The
U.S.  is  fighting  in  part  to  save  South  Vietnam,  but  there  is
a  limit  to  the  destruction  of  the  people  and  property  that
can  be  tolerated  before   something   gives;  the   government
collapses  or the  people  refuse  to  take  it  any  longer.  .  .  .
'    —Wall  St.  Journal  editorial,  Feb. 15.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  28,1966
Text:  Sen.  Robert  F.  Kennedy's  Historic  February  17th  Statement
This   week   has  been  another  chapter  in   a
great  tradition.   For  the   Senate  chamber  still
echoes   to   the   distant   ringing   of   the   great
issues  of  our  past.   War  and  westward  growth,
civil  strife  and   the  rights  of   man  have  been
argued   on   its   floor;   and   from   those   debates
have   emerged   the   shaping  events  and   judg-
ments  of  American history.
The  greater  the  issue,  the  larger  the  stakes,
the  more  passionately debate  has  raged,  in  the
Senate  and  across  the  land.   Abraham  Lincoln
was   reviled   for   opposing   the   war   of  1848.
The   citizens  of   his  own   state   called   Daniel
Webster   traitor  for   proposing   a   compromise
to  avoid  civil war.  Those  who  saw  the  storm,
and   tried   desperately   to   prepare   the   nation
for  World  War  II,  were  cursed  as  warmongers,
enemies  of   mankind,  subverters  of  democracy
—and  worse.
The  Risks  of  Freedom
Yet    despite   the    condemnations   and    the
violent  recriminations,  there  have  always  been
within   the   Senate   enough   men   of   courage
and   conviction  to   triumph  in   the   end   over
those   who   would   stifle   free   discussion   and
action.   There  are  hazards  in  debating  Ameri-
can  policy  in  the  face  of  a  stern  and  dangerous
enemy.    But   that   hazard   is   the   essence   of
democracy . . .
"The   best   test   of   truth  is   the   power   of
thought  to  get  itself   accepted  in  the  competi-
tion  of  the  market place,"  said  Justice  Holmes.
"That  at   any  rate  is  the  theory  of  our Con-
stitution.   It  is  an  experiment,  as  all  life  is  an
experiment.    Every  year,  if  not  every  day, we
have  to  wager  our  salvation  upon  some  proph-
ecy   based   on   imperfect   knowledge.    While
that  experiment  is  part  of  our  system,  I  think
that   we  should  be  eternally  vigilant    against
attempts  to  check  the   expression   of   opinions
that  we  loathe  and  believe  to  be  fought  with
depth."
Our  Constitution  imposes  on  the  Senate  the
most  heavy  and  grave  independent  responsibili-
ties.   We   ourselves  owe  to  the  people   of  50
States  the  burden  of  independent  thought  and
action.   Our  whole  system  of  government  rests
on  a  complex  structure  of  independence   and
cooperation   among   its   branches;   a   structure
which  requires   that  we  make  our  own  judg-
ments  about  events,  giving  due  weight   to  the
reason  and  responsibility  of  others.
Shall  we  then  debate  with  force  and  passion
the  issues  of  labor  relations  and  housing  and
trade—while   the   great   issues   of   peace   and
war  are  allowed  to  pass  in  silence?   Shall  we
discuss  the  standard  of  living  of  our   constitu-
ents—while   policies   which   affect   their   very
existence   go   undiscussed?    To   do   so  would
be  the  gravest   departure  from   our   duties   as
representatives   of  the  people  of  the  American
states.
Full  and  informing  debate  rests  upon mod-
eration   and   mutual   indulgence.    Men   must
seek  acceptance  of  their  views  through   reason,
and   not  through   intimidation;   through   argu-
ment,   and   not   through   accusation.    We   are
all   patriots   here.    We   are   all   defenders  of
freedom.    We   are   all   Americans.   To   attack
the   motives   of   those   who   express   concern
about   our   present   course—to   challenge   their
very  right  to  speak  freely—is  to  strike  at  the
foundations   of   the   democratic  process   which
our   fellow   citizens,  even  today,  are  dying  in
order  to  protect  .  . .
The   discussions   which   have   been   taking
place  in  recent  days  are  therefore  worthwhile
and  important.  But  we  must  do  all  we  can  to
make   certain   that   the    exchange   of    views
accomplishes  the  most for  our  country—moving
our   policy  toward  the  goals  we  all  want   to
achieve.    AH   of    us   are   concerned,   as    the
American   people   are   concerned,   about    the
progress  of  the  struggle  in  Vietnam.
There  are  several  aspects  to  this  concern.
We   are   concerned   at   the   casualties,   the
death   and   suffering,    of   our   young   men   in
South  Vietnam.
We   are  concerned   over  the   effect   of  some
of  our  military actions  on  the  people  of  South
Vietnam—whether   more   cannot   be   done   to
lessen  the  death  and  destruction  of  the  inno-
cent  that  comes  with war.  For  a  military vic-
tory   at   the   cost   of   a   completely   destroyed
South   Vietnam   would   be   a   defeat   for   our
larger  purposes.
We   are   concerned  whether   the   people  of
South   Vietnam  are   being   offered    something
positive  to  live  and  fight  for—something   be-
yond   negative   anti-communism.   The    Presi-
dent's   recent   initiatives  are  to   be  applauded
and   welcomed;  but   it   is  now  incumbent  on
the   government  of   South   Vietnam   to   make
good   at   last   on   promises   which   the   people
of    that    unhappy    country   have   heard    for
many  years.
Relations  With  China
We  are  concerned over  our  relationship  with
•  Communist  China—not  just  concern   to   avoid
a  deadly  war, but   also  concern  lest  the  Viet
Nam  struggle  make any reasonable accommoda-
tion   with   China   impossible   in   the   future.
The  events  of  the  coming  decade  will   deter-
mine   whether   our   relations   with   mainland
China   will   change  for  the  better   or   for   the
worse.   But  they  will  change  and  we  can  in-
fluence   that   change;    and    the   direction   of
change   must  receive  the   earnest   attention   of
the  Senate.
And   we  are  concerned   about   the   effect   of
the   war   on  our   domestic   efforts   to   conquer
ignorance   and   disease   and   unemployment—
the   problems  of   the   cities—problems   which,
warned   the  McCone  Commission,  could   split
our    society   irretrievably.    And   this   concern
is  heightened  by  the  way  in  which   the  war
perpetuates   discrimination—for   the   poor   and
the   less  fortunate  serve  in   Viet   Nam   out  of
all  proportion   to  their  numbers  in  the  United
States  as  a  whole.
But   the   central   question   before   us  now—
the   area  of  greatest   present   concern   for   the
Senate,   and   what   we   must   discuss    at    all
levels  of  government—is  our  political   strategy
in  the  war  in  Vietnam;   not   simply  how   to
move,  but  in  what  direction  we  wish  to  move.
At   the   outset,   it   must   be   realized    that
negotiations  are  not  an  ultimate  goal.   Nego-
tiations   or   discussions  are   only   a  means  by
which   ultimate  goals   may  be   reached.    Our
arrival  at  the  bargaining   table  will  not  make
the  struggle  disappear.   Even  if  we  arrive   at
the  bargaining  table,  the  real  question  is  what
goals  we will  seek  there  . . .
3  .
The    Secretary   of   State   and   others    have
stated  objectives  in  general   terms.   They   are
the   independence  of   South   Vietnam—or,   at
least,   its   independent  'right   to  determine   its
own   future.    They  are  to  halt  the  aggression
from   the  North   and  to  prove  to  China  that
a  policy  of  subversion  in  other  lands  will  not
work.   These   are  worthy  objectives.    All   are
important.    The   question   remains,    however,
under  what  realistic  terms  and  conditions   they
can  be  advanced  in  Vietnam.
There   are  three  routes   before  us:   military
victory,  a  peaceful   settlement,  or   withdrawal.
The  last  is  impossible  for  this  country.   For
the  United   States  to  withdraw  now, as  I  said
last  May, would  be  a  repudiation   of   commit-
ments   undertaken   and  confirmed  by  three  ad-
ministrations.   It  would  flatly  betray  those  in
Vietnam   whom   we  have  encouraged   by   our
support  to  resist  the  forces  of  Hanoi  and  the
Viet  Cong.    Unilateral   withdrawal  would  in-
jure,   perhaps   irreparably,   the   principle   of
collective   security,  and   undermine   the   inde-
pendence  of  small  nations  everywhere  in   the
world.    And   it   would   offer   no  hope  for   a
reasonable  accommodation with  China   in   the
future.   There  are  reasonable  and  responsible
steps  which  we  can  take  to  raise  the  possibility
of  improved relations  with  China in  the  future.
But  unilateral  withdrawal  would  only  reward
aggression   and  could  offer   China  no   induce-
ment   to   reach  accommodation  in   a   peaceful
world.
I  now  turn  to  the  open   avenues—military
victory  or  a  peaceful  settlement.
Military  victory  requires  that  we  crush  both
our   adversary's  strength  and  his  will  to con-
tinue   the   battle;   that   the   forces   from   the
north  be  compelled  to  withdraw  beyond   the
border;   that   much   of   Vietnam  be   destroyed
and   its   people   killed;   that   we   continue   to
occupy  South  Vietnam  as  long  as  our   presence
is  required  to  insure  that  hostilities,   including
insurgency,   will   not   be   resumed.    And   this
will  be  a  very  long  time  indeed.
Uncertain  Goal
I   cannot   say  with   certainty   that   such   an
outcome  is  beyond  our  reach.   We  do   know,
however,  that  it  would  mean  rapidly  increas-
ing  commitments of  American  forces.   It  would
mean  a  growing  risk  of  widening  war—with
North   Vietnam,  with   China,   even   with   the
Soviet  Union.    It  would  lead,  indeed   already
has  led  thoughtless  people  to  advocate  the  use
of  nuclear  weapons.   And  it  would  involve  all
these  things—commitment,  risk,  and  spreading
destruction—in  pursuit  of  a  goal  which  is  at
best  uncertain,   and  at  worst   unattainable.
Despite  all  these  dangers,  we  may  yet  come
to  this  course.   The  intransigeance  of  our  ad-
versaries  may  leave  us  no  alternative.   There
should  be  no  misunderstanding  or   miscalcula-
tion  of  this  point  in  either  Hanoi  or  Peking.
The  American  people  possess  the  bravery  and
the   will   to   follow   such  a   course   if   others
force   it   upon   us.   I   also   believe,   however,
that  given  the  opportunity  by  our  adversaries,
we   possess. the   wisdom,   and   skill   to   avoid
such  a  grim  necessity.
And   President   Johnson   has  made  clear,  on
behalf   of   the   United   States,   in   every   forum
of  the  world,  that  this  country  seeks  the  other
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  28,  1966
.  .  .  Proposing  A  Place  for  the  NLF  in  A  Future   Government
road:  the  road  to  negotiated  settlement.
In  this  pursuit  we  have  asked  for   uncondi-
tional  discussions.   This  means  simply  that  we
will  neither  demand   nor  yield  specific  formal
commitments    before    bargaining    begins.     In
fact,   both   sides   must   come   to   any   discussion
with   at   least   one   basic   condition;   one   irre-
ducible  demand;  one  point  they  will  not  yield.
For  ,the United   States  it  must  be  that  we  -will
not   turn   South   Vietnam   over   to   the  North.
For  North  Vietnam  it  must  be  that  they   will
not   accept   a   settlement   which   leaves   in   the
south   a  hostile  government,   dedicated  to   the
final   physical   destruction    of   all    Communist
elements,    refusing   any   economic   cooperation
with  the  North,  dependent  upon  the  continued
presence  of  American  military  power.
The  Minimum  Terms
These  conditions,  these  minimum  terms,  can
be   breached   only   at   sword's   point;   only   by
driving   the   adversary's   forces  from   the  field.
For  either   side   to  yield  its   minimum   condi-
tions  would  be  in  fact  to  accept  to  defeat.   If
we  intend   to  deny  these  minimum   conditions
to  our  adversaries,   then  we  must  defeat  them
completely.    If   this   is   what   we   intend,    we
should   understand   it   clearly—and    undertake
it  with   resolution.
But  if   negotiation   is  our  aim, as  we   have
so  clearly   said   it   is,  we   must   seek   a  middle
ground.    A   negotiated   settlement    means   that
each  side   must   concede   matters  that   are   im-
portant  in  order  to  preserve  positions  that  are
essential.
It   may  be  that   negotiation   is  not   possible
in   this   war   because   our   political   aims   are
irreconcilable;  because  one  side,  or  both  sides,
are  not  willing   to   accept   anything   less   than
the  fruits  of  victory ...
I   believe   there   is   a   middle  way,  that   an
end  to  the  fighting  and  a  peaceful   settlement
can  be  achieved.   It   must  be  said,   before   all
else,  that  the  middle  way—the  way  of   nego-
tiation—involves    risks.     An    adversary    who
lives   may  perhaps  fight   another   day.  And   a
government   which   is   not   continuously    shel-
tered    by   American   military   power    may   be
again  attacked  or  subverted  or  overthrown.
These   risks,   I   believe,  we   are   courageous
enough  to  undertake.   They   are  risks,  in   fact,
which   we   do   take   every   day   in   a   hundred
countries  in   every   corner   of   every   continent.
There   are   dozens   of   countries   which   might
be  the" target  of  Communist  aggression  or sub-
version.    If   we   were   unwilling   to   take   any
risk   that   they   might   be   subverted   or  con-
quered   by  the  Communists,  we   might   simply
have   occupied   all   of   them.    But   clearly,   we
would  rather  live  with  such  risks  than  attempt
to  occupy  these  nations.    We   take  these   risks
because  we  believe  men  and  nations  will   not
willingly  choose  to  submit  to  other  men  from
other  lands.
If   we  are   wrong   in   this   basic  faith,   then
Vietnam  will  be  but  a  flicker  in  the  conflagra-
tion  which  is  to  come.    But  in   Indonesia,   in
Algeria,   and  in  the  Central   African  Republic
the   Chinese   have   suffered    enormous   defeats
—not  because  we  are  stronger  or  more  skilled
than    they—not    because   we   defeated    them.
They    were   defeated    because   the   people   of
these   lands   preferred   to   run   their   affairs   in
their   own   way—and   our   faith   was   justified.
This   basic   faith   may   not   be   borne   out   on
every  occasion  in  every  land.   But  in  the  past
when  the  question  has  been  clearly  presented,
men  have  chosen  independence  and  fredom.
With   this  basic  faith   in   the  aspirations  of
man,  what   are   the   elements   of   a   settlement
in  Vietnam?
Whatever   the   exact  status  of   the   National
Liberation  Front—puppet  or  partly independent
—any   negotiated   settlement   must   accept   the
fact   that   there   are   discontented   elements   in
South   Viet   Nam,   Communist   and    non-Com-
munist,   who   desire   to   change   the    existing
political  and   economic  system  of  the  country.
There  are  three  things  you  can  do  with  such
groups:   kill  or  repress  them,  turn  the  country
over   to   them,   or   admit   them   to   a   share  of
power   and   responsibility.    The   first   two   are
now  possible  only  through  force  of  arms.
The   last—to   admit   them   to   a   share   of
power   and   responsibility—is   at   the   heart  of
the  hope  for  a  negotiated  settlement.   It  is  not
the   easy  way  or   the   sure  way; nor   can   the
manner  or  the  degree  of  participation   now  be
described   with   any   precision.     It   may   come
about   through   a   single   conference   or   many
meetings,  or  by  a  slow  undramatic  process   of
gradual   accommodation.   It  will   require   enor-
mous   skill   and   political   wisdom   to   find   the
point   at   which   participation    does   not   bring
domination  or  internal   conquests.   It  will  take
statesmanship  willing  to  exploit   the  very   real
differences    of    ambition   and    intention     and
interest   between    Hanoi   and   Peking   and   the
Soviet   Union.   //   may   mean   a    compromise
government   jully    acceptable   to   neither    side.
It   certainly  means  that  we  must  take   consid-
erable  risks  in  the  expectation   that  social  and
economic   success  will   weaken   the   appeal   of
Communism—and  that  sharing  the  burden  and
the   satisfaction   of   helping   to  guide   a   nation
will  attract  hostile  elements  toward  a  solution
which  will  preserve  both  the  independence  of
their   country   and   their   new   found   share   of
power.   And   we  must  be  willing   to  face   the
uncertainties   of   election,   and   the    possibility
of  an  eventual  vote  on  reunification.  We  must
be   prepared   to  think   about   what   kind   of   a
relationship   such   a   reunified   country   would
have   to   the    United    States,    to   Communist
China,  to  the  Soviet   Union.
Toward  A  Settlement
If  we  are  willing  to  accept  these  uncertain-
ties   and   run   these   risks—and   if   our   adver-
saries  are  willing  to  submit  their  cause  to  the
same   arbitration,   the   same  peaceful   choice—
then   a   settlement   may  be   possible;   and   the
other   hazards,   the   hazards  of   widening  con-
flict  and  devastation,  may  be  ended.
Of  course,  such  a  road  toward  solution  must
be   protected    from    sudden   and   violent    up-
heaval.    There   must   be   international   guaran-
tees   to   back   up   agreement,   good   faith   and
mutual   self-interest.   Foreign   forces   must   be
withdrawn,    by   balanced   and    varied    stages.
And  we  must  insist  that  the  political  process
go  forward  under  the  rigorous   supervision  of
a  trusted  international  body.
I  would  stress  that  such  a  settlement  would
not  end.  our  burden  or  our  vigilance  in   Viet-
nam.    President   Johnson   has  made  clear   that
we  are   ready  to   help  with  economic  aid   for
North  Vietnam.   Further,  if  South  Vietnam  is
to   remain  free   to  determine  its   own  destiny
and  to  live  in  harmony  with  the  North,  then
we   must   help   repair   the   ravages  of   twenty
years   of  war.  Our   reconstruction  effort   may
be   nearly   as  costly,  and   more  demanding  of
care  and  intelligence,  than  is  our  present  mili-
tary   effort.    And   we   must   continue  to  stand
guard  against  any  violation  of  the  agreement,
which  must  make  clear  that  the  United  States
would  not  permit  the  country  or  the  govern-
ment  to  be  seized  by  an  outside   power.
.There   will   be   many   other   difficulties   and
problems.   I  do  not  pretend  to  be  able  to  fore-
cast  all  the  details  of  a  final  settlement,  or   the
process  by  which  it  may  be  reached.   That  is
the  task  of  statesmanship, in  full  command  of
all   the   channels  of   communication.    But   we
must   have  our   terms   set  firmly  in   our   own
minds.    And   we   must  reveal  enough   of   our
intentions   to   Hanoi   to   eliminate  any  reason-
able   fear   that   we   ask  them   to   talk   only   to
demand  their  surrender.
Missile  Crisis  Recalled
And   they  must  be  given   to   understand  as
well  that  their  present   public  demands  are  in
fact  for  us  to  surrender  a  vital  national   inter-
est—but  that,  as  a  far  larger  and  more  power-
ful    nation   learned   in   October   of   1962, sur-
render  of  a  vital  interest  of  the  United   States
is  an  objective  which  cannot  be  achieved.
I   am  aware   that  the  United   States  cannot
proclaim   in   advance  the   precise   terms  of   an
acceptable    political    settlement.     We    cannot
show  all  our  cards  before  we  get  to  the bar-
gaining  table.   Nor   can  we  make  all  our con-
cessions  before  receiving   concessions  from  the
other  side.   To  so  commit  ourselves  would   be
to   show   a   weakness   which   could   not   serve
the  cause  of  justice  or  the  cause  of   peace.
But   we   ourselves   must   look   at   our   own
cards.    And   we   must   show   enough   of   them
to  persuade  our   adversaries  that   a  settlement
is  in  their  interests  as  well  as  our own.
The   Senate  could  serve  no  higher   function
than   to   discuss—for   the   benefit  of   our   own
people,  for  our  adversaries,  and  for  the   people
of   the   world—a   framework  within   which   a
settlement  would  be  acceptable.
That   is  why  discussion   and  debate   in   the
Senate   are   now   so  important.    We   stand   at
the   doorway   of   great   decisions   and    fateful
action.    To   decide   in   ignorance   is   to   risk
disaster.    But   if   we   now   can   clearly   define
our  ends  in  South  Vietnam,  if  we  can  at  least
begin  discussing what  our  future relations  with
mainland   China   are   to   be,   if   we   can   adapt
our  means  to  those  ends,  and,  most   important,
if   we  -can  use  only  that  force—and   no  more—
that   is  needed  to  accomplish   these   objectives,
then  there  is  hope  that  they  may  be  achieved
without   prohibitive   cost   to   ourselves,   to   the
people   of   Vietnam,   or   to   the   peace   of   the
world.  And  if  this  debate  can  reach  such  a  defi-
nition,   we   will   know   at   least   that   we  have
followed   the   path   of   reason   and   realism   as
far   as  it  now  can  lead.
And  we  will  have  worked   to  meet  our   re-
sponsibilities  to  our  posterity—to  walk the final
mile  toward  peace,  not  so  much  for   ourselves,
as  for  those  who  will  come  later.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. P. Stone's  Weekly,  February  18,1866
An  Approach  to  Vietnam  in  the  Best  Kennedy  Tradition
(Continued   from  Page   Two)
whether  we  should  in  advance  of  negotiation   assure  the  Viet
Cong  of  some  place  in  a  new  government.     The  difference
rises  from  a  different  view  of  the  war  and  of  the  nature  of
the  rebellion;  Johnson   is  making  a  liberal  of  Kennedy  and  a
war-monger  of  Humphrey.    We  reprint  Kennedy's   statement
in  full  (except  for  four  minor  inconsequential  cuts  for   space
reasons)   because  we  believe  it  represents  a  political   event  of
the first magnitude.    It  embodies  the  best  of  the  Kennedy  tra-
dition—the  late  President  began  as a hard-liner  and  ended,  as
the  American  University  speech   showed,   by  recognizing   the
need  for  co-existence.    The  Robert  Kennedy  statement   begins
with  an  eloquent   defense  of  the  right  to  speak  out  on  the
war  which  is very  different from  the  snide  effort  of  the  White
House   to  portray   critics  as  giving  aid  and   comfort   to   the
enemy.     On  China,  Kennedy   sees  the   question   not   just  in
terms  of  avoiding  "a  deadly  war"  but  "lest  the  Vietnam  strag-
gle  make  any  reasonable  accommodation   with   China   impos-
sible  in  the  future."    This  is  fresh  and   hopeful.
Not  Rusk's  Holy  War  View
In  seeking  a  way  out,  Senator  Kennedy  is  objective  enough
to  recognize  that  North  Vietnam  must  have  minimum  assur-
ance  that  any  settlement   will  not  leave  the  South   in   posses-
sion  of  "a  hostile  government,   dedicated  to  final  physical  de-
struction  of  all  Communist  elements,  refusing   any  coopera-
tion  with  the  North,  dependent   upon  the  continued   presence
of  American  military  power."    Most  important  of  all  is  his
readiness  to  see  that  "Whatever  the  exact  status,  of  the  Na-
tional  Liberation  Front—puppet  or  partly  independent—any
negotiated  settlement  must  accept  the  fact  that  there  are  dis-
contented  elements  in  South  Vietnam,   Communist  and  non-
Communist  who  desire  to  change  the  existing  political   and
economic  system of  the  country."    This  is  very  different  from
the   Manichean   holy   war   views   of   Rusk   and   the   Bundy
How  to Avoid  Candor With  Agility
Sen.  AIKEN:  Aren't  all  our bases  surrounded  by  the
Viet  Cong?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  Not  in   [the   way]   the   word  "sur-
rounded"  suggests.    They  have  mortar.    Six  men  can
have  a   mortar  attack,   and  get   away   with   it.    But
40,000   Marines  being  in  danger  of  the  Viet  Cong—I
am  sure  all  40,000  Marines  would  rise  in  anger  at  the
suggestion.
Sen.  AIKEN: I  think  you are right.   But  on the  other
hand  it   isn't  safe   for  American  soldiers   at  least   to
venture  out  of  the  bases.
Gen.  TAYLOR: Senator,  there  are  bases  in  Wash-
ington  that  are  not  safe  to  walk  around  at   night.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Comm. hearing  Feb.  17.
brothers.
The  Kennedy   statement   recalls  de  Gaulle's   magnanimous
appeal  to  the  Algerian  rebels  for  "a  peace  of  the  brave."    It
treats  our  adversaries  as  human.    To  suggest  that  we  admit
the  National  Liberation  Front  "to  a  share  of  power  and  re-
sponsibility"   took    courage.     It    invited    the    inflammatory
charge  that  the  Senator  was  suggesting  a  coalition   with  the
Communists.    The  history  of  such  coalitions  is  a  painful   one,
though  countless   lives  were   saved  when   President   Kennedy
chose  the  path  of  coalition   rather  than  intervention   in   Laos.
The   mention   of   coalitions   with   the   Communists   at   once
brings   up   their   history  in  Eastern   Europe   where  the   non-
Communist  participants  were  soon  made  the  helpless  prison-
ers  of  their  partners.    But  there  is  some  merit  in  the   obser-
vation  that  these  postwar   coalitions  did  not  degenerate  into
facades  until  the  cold  war  and  the  Marshall  Plan  were  used
to  drive  the   Communists   out  of  the  Popular  Fronts   which
governed   France  and  Italy  after  the  war.    There  is  a  legacy
of  justifiable suspicion  on  both  sides.    In  Southeast   Asia  our
(Continued   on  Page  Six)
Rusk  Still  Clings  to  His  Mythology  About  Diem  and  The  Origins  of  The  Revolt
"In  agreeing  to  the  1954  Accords,  the  regime  in  Hanoi
fully   expected  that  within  a  relatively  short   period  the
South   Vietnamese   would  fall   under   their   control.     The
South  seemed  overburdened with  troubles.  .  .  .  The  North
moreover  had  concealed  resources  in  the  South.  .  .  .  Many
Communists  fighting  with  the  Viet  Minh  had  been directed
by  the  Lao  Dong  party  in  Hanoi  to  stay  in  the  South,  to
hide  their  arms,  and  to  devote  their  efforts  to  undermining
the  South  Vietnamese  Government.  . . .  Much  to  the  dismay
of   the   Hanoi  regime   South  Viet-Nam   made  substantial
progress  in  spite  of  the  extraordinary  problems  it  faced,
while  North Viet-Nam lagged  far  behind. As  a  consequence
the  Communist  leaders  in  North  Viet-Nam were  forced  to
conclude  that  more  active  measures  were  necessary  if  the
subversion  of  South Viet-Nam  were  to  succeed ...  to  take
over  the  people  of  the  other  half  at  the  point  of  a  gun  and
against  their  will."
—Secretary  Rusk  to Senate  Foreign  Relations Feb. 18.
"The  popularity of  the  Diem  regime  had  begun  to  wane
seriously  as  early  as  1957. .  .  .  The  attitude  toward  Diem
and  his  family  had begun  to  change  from  disinterest  or con-
tempt   to  animosity,   chiefly   because   of   the   economic  and
political  regimentation. ...  In the  countryside,  where  there
was less  political  awareness  of  what was  going  on in  Saigon,
many  peasants  had  begun  to  formulate  their  own   opposi-
tion:  this  was also due to increasing  regimentation.  .  . . Re-
peatedly  the  Americans  suggested  that  Diem  either  estab-
lish  a  coalition-type regime  or  permit  a  political  opposition
to  function. ...  By  1962  there  were  some  30,000   prisoners
in  about  50  jails  throughout  the  country,  about  two-thirds
of  whom  were  classified  as  political  prisoners.    Many  were
captured  Vietcong  insurgents,  but  there  were  also  a  lot  of
'suspects'  who  had  languished   in  jails  for  months  or  even
years.   Among the  prisoners  were some  300 non-Communist
liberals   arrested   solely   for   having   expressed   anti-Diem
views  or  for  being  suspected  of  having  spoken  out  in  favor
of  the  abortive  1960  coup."
—Robert  Shaplen:  The  Lost  Revolution.    The  Story  of  20
Years   of  Neglected  Opportunities  in  Vietnam   and  of  Amer-
ica's  Failure   to  Foster  Democracy  There  (Harper,   1965).
"In  1955  every  opponent had  been  denounced  [by  Diem]
as  a  left-over  from   the   'feudal   rebels'  supported   by   the
colonialists.    After  1956 every  opponent  was  called a Com-
munist. ...  At  first  the struggle  was  conducted by  aimplr
means;  concentration camps. ...  It  was  the  dictatorship  in
the  South  that  kindled  the  fire."
—Jean  Lacouture:  Vietnam  /itficrrn  Two  Truces   (l\:ui
dom  House,  19G6),  a  leading  Frmch   authority.
3  5
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  28,1966
The  Wide  Open  Door  to  Peace  Johnson   Refuses  to  See
(Continued  from   Page   Five)
adversaries  will  see  the  Kennedy  offer  in  the  light  of  a  differ-
ent   history.     They   have  not   forgotten   the  way  the   French
broke  the  postwar  agreements  by which  Ho  Chi  Minh  agreed
to  stay  in  the  French  Union  in  return  for  the  promise  of  an
autonomous  and  united  Vietnam.    Nor   have  they  forgotten
what  happened   the. last  time  they  were  promised   free   elec-
tions.    This  record   of  broken   pledges   and  the   Administra-
tion's  equivocal  rhetoric  explain  why, in  Senator  Kennedy's
words,   "we  must  reveal  enough  of  our  intentions  in  Hanoi
to  eliminate  the  reasonable  fear  that  we  ask  them  to  talk only
to  demand   their   surrender."
Any  Place  They're  Ready  to   Surrender
Sen.  AIKEN:  Then you  . .  .  intimate  that  the time  to
negotiate  is  after  we  have  defeated them.
Gen.     TAYLOR:   I   wouldn't   say  defeat ...  but  I
would  say   until   it  is  quite  sure  that  their  course  of
action  is  a  losing  one.  .  . .
Sen.   AIKEN:   Is    that    consistent    with   President
Johnson's  position that  he  will  negotiate with anybody,
anywhere,  any  time.  .  . .?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  No, sir,  I  don't  detect  that.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Comm.  hearing  Feb.  17.
Widening  LBJ's  Options
If   the   Johnson   Administration  is  really  ready  for   some-
thing   other   than   the  unconditional   surrender  of   the   other
side,  it  should  be  grateful  to  Senator  Kennedy  for  breaking
the  ice.    Any  representative  government   in  South  Vietnam
will  have  the  National  Liberation  Front  in  it.    Whatever   the
extent  of  its  support,  it  is  certainly  more  representative  than
the  little  clique  of  military  men, absentee  landlords  and  war
profiteers  who  are  the  base  of  the  Saigon  government.    If  the
Saigon  government   had  any  other  support,   it  wouldn't  be  so
fearful   of   allowing  a  free  press   and   free   political   activity. •
If   honorable   negotiations  are  to  be  possible,   someone  must
begin  to  talk  of  these  realities.    The  Senate  ought  to  embody
Kennedy's   views   in   an   advisory  resolution   as  a   means  of
widening  Johnson's  options  and  making  peace  more  attain-
able.    If  Johnson  on  the  other  hand  is  merely    talking  peace
to  cover  escalation,  if  he  is building up  troops  and  bases  for  a
showdown  with  China,  then  the  sooner  the  country  is  alerted
and  his  leadership  challenged  the  better.
Senator  Kennedy  harks  back  to  the  Cuban  missile  crisis  as
a  model  for  action  combining  firmness  and   flexibility.     We
regard   the   episode   more   astringently.    The   missile  crisis,
which  might  have  brought  world  disaster  if  either  opponent
slipped,  is  a  warning  of  the  perils  ahead  if  international  dis-
putes   are  to   be   resolved  in   a   lawless  world   (like   a   TV-
Western  saloon)   by  eyeball-to-eyeball  confrontation.   But  in
one  way  it  was  a  model  which  can  be  applied  to  the  Viet-
namese  war.   The  ingenuity  with  which  President  Kennedy
found  a  basis  for  mutually  satisfactory   settlement  in  an  ob-
scure  hint  Khrushchev  may  or  may  not  have  meant  seriously
was  creative  statesmanship.    It  would  take  only  a  very  little
of  this  quality  to  find  a  way  out  of  the  Vietnamese  morass.
The  simplest  way  would  be  to  open  negotiations  quietly  and
directly  with  the  National  Liberation  Front  and  Hanoi  on  the
meaning  of  point  three  in  its  Four  Points,  the  only  one  the
Administration  claims is unacceptable.   This  says "the internal
affairs   of   the   South  Vietnam  must  be  settled  by  the   South
Vietnamese   people  themselves,   in  accordance  with   the pro-
gram  of  the  National   Liberation  Front  without  any  foreign
interference."     The  program  of  the  Front  calls  for  "  a gov-
ernment  of  national  and  democratic  union"  representing "all
social   classes ...  the  various  political  parties ...  all re-
ligions";  the  reestablishment  of  political freedom  and  expres-
sion,  and  the  election  of  "a  new  National   Assembly  through
universal  suffrage"  (text  at  p.  216  of  The   Vietnam  Reader,
edited  by  Raskin  and  Fall).    On  its  face,  this  calls  for   free
elections,  to   determine  the   South's   future   independently   of
the  North.    If  the  Johnson  Administration  is  sincere  in  talk-
ing  about  free  elections—which  we  doubt—it  could  prove  its
sincerity  by  getting   down  to  brass  tacks  and  discussing with
the  other  side  just  how  Point  Three  would  be  implemented.
That's  a  wide  open   door  compared  to  the  murky  loophole
John   F.  Kennedy  used   to  get   us  and  the   Russians  out  of
collision  course  in  the  missile  crisis.
IFS   and   Jean   Lacouture  Will   Speak  With  Sgt.  Donald  Duncan   on  The  Truth  About  "Special   Forces"   at
Town  Hall,  New  York  City,  7:15  p.m.,  March  3
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
2/28/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..................................I...........................................
Street     ........................................................................................
City  ....  ...................   .............  .Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
•   annnu'Hement   wished  D
IF. Stone's   Weekly
5618  Nebrnka  Ave.,  N.  W.
Wiihington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
Reprints  of  This   Issue  Available  in  Bulk  Orders  of  100  or  More  at  5c  Each  Plus  Postage
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED