I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966dec12.pdf

============================================================

US.  Indifferent    as Saigon  Votes Down Land  Reform,  P.  3
Our  Favorite  Republican  Lets  LBJ  Have  It
" The  time  has  come to  stop  the  rhetoric about  a  'rebirth
of   American  cities'  unless  we  are  willing  as  a  nation  to
treat  that  goal  as  our highest  domestic  priority.  .  .  .  Some-
thing  is  wrong .  .  .  when  we  reduce our  commitment  to  our
cities  by  well  over  a  billion  dollars  at   the  same  time  we
leave  our  space  program virtually  intact.'  He  [Mayor  Lind-
say]  also  reiterated his  view that  the  escalation  of  the  war
in  Vietnam  was  not  the  best  road  to  peace."
—"Lindsay   Accuses  Johnson   of  'Shortchanging  Cities'"
in  the  New  York  Times  Dec. ,?.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  40
December  12,  1966
"»<       WASHINGTON,   D.   C.IB   CENTS
Will the Cold Warriors Turn Tepid in the Rhodesian  Crisis?
Rhodesia,  by  any  standard,  ranks  just  about   at  the  worst
end  of  the  political  spectrum,  with  South  Africa  its  only  rival.
Nowhere  else  is  there  so  complete,  ruthless  and  wilfully  blind
a  domination  of  a  racial  majority  by  a  racial  minority,  mon-
opolizing  the   best  land  and  living  off  the  majority's  cheap
labor.    This  is  true  to  some  degree  in  every  country  where
white  and  colored  peoples  live  together;  the  whiter  tend  to  be
on   top,   the  darker  on  the   bottom,   even   in   such   supposed
models  of  racial  equality  as  Brazil.    Since  the  colored  peoples
are  in  the  majority  on  this planet,  and  the  technology  of  mass
murder  is  spreading,  this  cannot  go  on  forever.    The  way  to
avoid  the  rise  of  a  repressive  Black  Power  is  to  relinquish  an
oppressive  White  Power.    Rhodesia  puts  the  question  starkly.
A  Little  Force  Now
If  we  were  wise,  the  United  Nations  would  not  depend  on
economic sanctions in  the  Rhodesian  crisis,  for  these  are  bound
to  be  ineffective,  and  to  create  more  resentment  and  disillusion
in  Africa,  where  faith  in  law  as  a  means  of  social  change  has
already   been   irreparably  hurt   by  the   World   Court's   igno-
minious  legalism  in  the  case  of   South   West  Africa.    With
U.S.    support  the  United  Nations  would  muster  an  army  and
march  it  into  Rhodesia.     A  relatively  little  force  now  could
prevent  major  suffering  later.    The   Africans  see  us  mobilize
a  multi-million  dollar  juggernaut  in  Vietnam  in  a  test  of will
and  prestige with  our  imperial rivals,  Russia  and  China.    We
can  hardly expect  them  to  believe  we  are  helpless  to  deal  with
Rhodesia's   11,000-man  army,  8,000  of   them  blacks,  with  a
handful  of  planes  and  no  access  to  the  sea.    Our  propaganda
insists  that  we  are  only  in  South  Vietnam  to  assure  its  people
freedom   of  choice.    That   propaganda  will   backfire   in  Rho-
desia,  where  only  the   feeblest   steps   are  envisaged   to  make
220,000  whites  give  not  freedom  of  choice  but  some  hope  of
future  freedom  to  4,000,000  blacks.   The  arithmetic  is  deadly.
The  terms  Harold  Wilson  offered  Ian  Smith  gave  the  white
Rhodesians  everything  they  could  ask  in  the  way  of  gradual-
ism.      Not   "all   deliberate  speed,"  as  in  our  Supreme   Court
school   decision,  but   every  possibility  of   procrastination   was
embodied  in  the  British  government's   terms  except  one — the
power   to  pull   a  bluff,   to  do  nothing   about  putting   multi-
Money  For  War  But  Not  on  Poverty
"A  leader  of  Washington's  war  on  poverty  said  this
morning  he  is  convinced  the   program  has   been   tor-
pedoed'  and  advised  his  staff  members to  seek  new  jobs
.   .   .   said   Robert   T.   Adams,   executive   director  of
Friendship  House,  'Congress  will  not  appropriate  more
money  for  this  program.  .  .  .  Shame  on  us—shame  on
a  nation  that  sells  its   poor  down  the  river'."
—Washington  Evening  Star, Dec. 2.
racialism  into  action,  and  then  to  secede  again  with  impunity.
Only  British  control  of  the  Rhodesian  army  and  police  could
prevent  it,  and  on  that  Britain—to  its  honor—refused  to  com-
promise.    This  was  again  one  of  England's  "finest  hours"—
those  who  remember  England's  response  to  the  attack  on  Po-
land  after  all  the  shabby  efforts  to  appease  Hitler  know  how
she  tends  to  flunk  every  test  but  the  last.
But  this  is  ultimately  our  test,  not  Britain's.    A  showdown
requires  American  support  of  the  shaky  pound  sterling,   and
American   readiness   to   back   action   so  overwhelming   as   to
frighten   South  Africa  and  Portugal.    Neither  has  yet  recog-
nized  the  Rhodesian  regime.    Both  are  waiting  to  see  which
way   the   wind   blows.     They   will   abandon   the   Rhodesians
rather  than  be  drawn  into  a  conflict  with  the  rest  of  the  world
if  the  U.S.  is  firm.  And  the  U.S.  here  means  the  great  Rocke-
feller  family  with  its  Chase  Manhattan  bank  and  its  vast  in-
vestments  in  South  Africa.   Nelson  Rockefeller  was  ready  to
send  U.S.  troops  into  the  Congo  some  years  ago  and  take  to
one  of  his  many  bomb  shelters.*    But  the  chances  are  these
cold  warriors  will  turn  tepid  in  the  Rhodesian  crisis.    One  of
the  great  conflicts  of  human  history  has  begun.
*  "Mr.  Rockefeller,  an  enthusiastic  believer  in  fallout  shel-
ters,  also  had  shelters  built  at  his  homes  in  Pocantico  Hills,
Washington,  the  executive  mansion  here,  and  his  apartment
house  at  810  Fifth  Avenue in  New  York  City"—Albany  dis-
patch  in  New  York  Times  Dec.  3  reporting  that  the  Gover-
nor's  inaugural  ball  had  been  cancelled  "because  a   fallout
shelter  is  being  built  under  the  dance   floor."   One  wonders
what  the  Governor  plans  to  do  when  he  emerges  after   the
next  World  War—operate  an  ESSO   filling   station?
15
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's   Weekly,  December 12,1966
The  Socialists;  They  Went  Out Heroes  30  Years  Ago  and  Come  Back   Trimmers
Germany's  New  "Great  Coalition"  A  Case  of  Bi-Partisan  Bankruptcy
Germany's  new  "Grosse  Koalition"  is  great  in  size  not  con-
ception.   It  is long on  votes and  short  on  policies.   When you
add  a  plus  and  an  equal  minus,  you get  nothing  at  all.    The
Coalition   joins  together  a  Christian  Democratic  Union   which
is  not  Christian  and  a  Social  Democratic   party  which  is  no
longer   socialist.    The  new  Chancellor   Kiesinger   was  a  Nazi
who  stayed  in  the  party  until  the  end  despite  what  he  now
claims  were  early  misgivings;   in  this  he  is  a  typical  German
figure.    The  new  Vice   Chancellor   Brandt  was  an   anti-Nazi
who  fled  rather  than  knuckle  under,  and  it  is  equally   char-
acteristic  that  this  resistance—instead  of  bringing  him   honor
—was  long  held  against  him.  The  strongest  figure  in  the  new
government   is  Strauss,  a militant nationalist,  who  wants  a way
to  give  Germany  nuclear  military  power.    The  Social  Demo-
crats,  on  the  other  hand,  want  the  Reich  to  renounce   nuclear
weapons.    It  is  only  because  both  parties  have  lost  their  vital-
ity  that  a  marriage  between   them  is   possible.
A  Vacuum,   Not  A  Crisis
Even  so  the  coalition  is  not  popular  with  the  rank-and-file
of  either  party.     It  robs  both  party  programs   of  credibility.
How  can  either   be  taken  seriously  if  they  can  so  easily  get
together?    To  join  forces  in  a  crisis would  be  admirable.    To
do  so  in  a  vacuum  is  laughable.    On  foreign  policy  the  Social
Democrats   were  closer  to  the  Free  Democrats,   and  the  latter
offered   the  Socialists  the   "unconditional   support"  of  all  49
Free  Democratic  deputies   {London   Sunday  Telegraph,   Nov.
27)   just  two  hours  before  Kiesinger  and  Brandt  made  their
agreement.     In  a  coalition  with  the  Free  Democrats,   Brandt
would  have  been  Chancellor,  the  Socialists the  major party  and
a  clear  line  in  foreign  policy  attainable.    The   Socialists  were
afraid—of   the  narrow  6-vote  margin  this  would   have  given
them—and   probably   also   of   taking   the   leadership.    This
would  have  produced  a  meaningful  program  on  which  to  face
new  elections if  necessary.   But  it  would  also  have  meant  go-
ing   against  Washinton's  wishes,  and   the   German   Socialists
aspire  to  circle  loyally  in  our  orbit.
All  the  best  elements  in  the  Social  Democratic  party  were
against  the   big  coalition.    Le   Monde's   Bonn   correspondent
reported  (Dec.  3)  that when  Kiesinger  took  the  oath  of  office,
the  Christian .Democrats  were  virtually  the  only  ones  to  ap-
plaud.    On  the  23rd  of  March,.1933,  after  Hitler  had  gained
a  majority  by  outlawing  the  Communists,  the  Socialists  were
the  only  ones  to  vote  against  him.    Their  leaders  paid  with
death  and  exile.   Thirty  years later  the  Social  Democrats  come
back  into  government  under  one  who  was  then  a  Nazi,  and
Ky's   Glorious  Free  Press  Dept.
"A  tame  Communist committed  to  ownership of  pri-
vate  property  was  displayed  before  the  press  by  the
Vietnamese   government  this   afternoon   and  billed  as
one  of  the  highest  ranking  Reds  ever  to  desert  the  en-
emy  camp.   He  is  Le Trung  Chuyen, a  handsome,  well-
dressed,   neatly   groomed   Lt.  Colonel.  .   .  .   Chuyen's
views  seemed  in  so  many ways  to  parallel those  of  Pre-
mier  Ky  and  the  Military  Directorate.  .  .  .  There  were
smiles  from  the  Vietnamese  press  at  part  of  his  reply
as  to  why  he  had  defected.    'I  think  that  we  should  be
free,'  he  said.    'I  read  the  newspapers  from  the  south
because  you can  talk  about what  you want,  report  about
what  you  want.'    The  Vietnamese  newsmen  were  smil-
ing   because  their  press   is   heavily  censored,   and  ob-
viously   so   because   each   day   there   are   large   white
patches  on  the  front  pages  and  editorial  pages  where
offending  items  have  literally  been  chiselled   out."
—Ward  Just  from  Saigon  in  Wash.  Post, Nov. 29.
as  junior  partner  with  a  party  which  is  the  lineal  descendant
of  those  Catholic  Centrists  who  voted  that  day  to  make  Hit-
ler   dictator.     Willy   Brandt's   own   son,   Peter,   joined    1500
demonstrators,  mostly  students,  in  Berlin  who  marched  with
banners   reading   "Black   and   red—democracy   dead"   (black
for   the   Catholic   clericals,   red  for   the   Socialists)   while   the
novelist  Gunther   Grass,   Brandt's   friend,   also   protested.
Prance-Son's  Bonn  correspondent   reported   (Nov.   29)   that
it  took  an  all-night  debate  to  get  60%  of  the  Socialist  deputies
to  accept  the  coalition  agreement  with  Kiesinger.    The  oppo-
sition  thought  the  party  ought  not  to  associate  itself  with  the
CDU  just  when  it  had  proven  bankrupt  in  economic  as  well
as  foreign  policy, that  it  ought  not  to  ally  itself  with  a  nation-
alist  like  Strauss  and  that  the  millions  who  voted   Socialist  in
the  last  election  did  not  do  so  to  place  an  ex-Nazi  at  the  head
of  the  government.     Seven  of  the  11  Social  Democratic  State
organizations  disapproved,   and   in  North   Rhine-Westphalia,
Germany's  most  populous   state,  the  Social  Democrats  formed
a  "little  coalition"  with  the  Free  Democrats.    The  leader  of
the  Young  Socialists even  went  so  far  as to  propose  the organ-
ization  of  an  opposition  group  within  the  Social  Democratic
party.    The  fear  was  expressed  that  the  Big  Coalition  would
create  disillusion with  democracy  by  producing  a  huge  bureau-
cratic  state,  with  no  real  policy,  leaving  the  opposition  to  the
Reich's  extreme  right-wingers,  the  so-called  National   Demo-
crats.    Only  the  State  Department   seems  to  regard  the  new
government  with  satisfaction.
We  May Kill  A  Lot  More  People  But  We'll Make  the  Pimps  and Whores Happy
"Saigon,  Dec.  2—U.S.  combat  troops  will  start  moving
into  the  Mekong Delta  south  of  Saigon  'by  the  end  of  the
year'  Premier  Nguyen  Cao  Ky  said  today. .  .  .  Premier Ky
belittled  reservations  expressed  by  South  Vietnamese politi-
cians   and   some   American  diplomats.    The   reservations
centered  on  possible  anti-American reactions  by  the  people
in  the  densely  populated  delta  to  heavy  civilian  casualties
.  that  use  of  U.S.  flrepower  is  expected  to  entail."
—New  York  Times, Dec. 3.
"Cantho,   South  Vietnam,  Dec.   2—Confident   that   large
numbers  of  U.S.  troops  are  coming  here  soon,  South  Viet-
namese  businessmen and  women are  turning  their attention
to  this  central  Mekong  Delta  city.
"In the  last  three  months,  construction has  doubled. Real
estate  prices  have  doubled,  tripled  and  in  some  cases  in-
creased  tenfold,  sources  say.    Every  day  bar  girls  and pros-
titutes  step  off  rickety  buses  from  Saigon,  80  miles  to  the
north,  scanning  through  heavily   made  up  eyes  their  new
base  of  operations."
—Same  paper,  same  day.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  December  12, 1966
The  Mystery  of  Tran  Van  Trail's  Assassination:   He  Was  for  Peace  Talks
Third  World  Grumbling  Over  U  Thant's  Surrender  to  Big Power  Pressure
EXTRA:  The  news   at   press   time  of   Tran  Van   Van's
assassination  in  Saigon   is  puzzling.   The  UPI  ticker  re-
ported,  "Many of  Van's  colleagues  in  the  Assembly  refused
to  believe  the  police  version"  that  he  had  been  killed  by
Viet  Cong  agents.    Reuters  said  the  Assembly  would  es-
tablish  an  investigating  committee  of  its  own.    Tran  Van
Van  was  Ky's  principal  rival  for  the  Presidency.   Though
a  wealthy  landowner,  a  right  winger  and  an  opponent  of
land  reform,  the   astute   and  urbane  Tran  Van  Van   was
also  an  opponent  of  military  rule  as  he  had  been  of   the
Diem  dictatorship,  and  advocated  a  negotiated  peace.    He
was  a  leader  of  the  Mekong Delta  southerners  and  a critic
of   Ky's  military  junta  as   Northern dominated.
Behind  the  unanimity with  which  the  Security  Council  and
the   General   Assembly   (with   one  abstention,   probably   Al-
bania)  greeted  U  Thant's  decision  to  accept  another  full  term
as   Secretary  General   was  considerable   private   disagreement
among  the  non-aligned  nations.    Though  it  may  seem  fantas-
tic  to  Americans  conditioned  by  the  cold  war,  the  fear  which
obsesses   the   non-aligned    is   U.S.-Soviet   domination   of   the
world.*
The  Bombings  Punctuate  Their  Fears
The  continued   bombing   of  North  Vietnam,   and  the  lack
of   Soviet   counter-action,   they   see  as  a   threatening   shadow
across   their   own   future.    They   ask  whether   Vietnam,   like
Hungary   before  it,  are  samples  of  what  the  small  powers  are
to  expect   if  they  challenge   the  two  big  ones.     They   regard
U  Thant's  statement  last   September   that  he  would   not  run
again  as  a  salutary  protest,  and  some  believe  he  should   have
held  out  for  an  end  to  the  bombings  as  the  price  of  staying
on.    They  note  that  he  said  his  change  of  mind  under  pres-
sure  from  the  great  powers  "is  not  based  on  any new  element
which  has  developed  in  recent  weeks  or  any  fond  hope  for
the  foreseeable  future."    This  clearly  means  no  promises  were
made  him.    This  background   makes  it  easier   to   understand
The  Peasant,   Not  the  Guerrilla,  Gets  Hit
"The   Pentagon,  aware  the  Viet  Cong  fears  sudden
bombing  attacks  most,  has  almost  doubled the  force  of
B-52s flying  missions  to Vietnam  . .  .  they  get  no warn-
ing   from   the   high-flying   B-52s  and,  unless   they   are
near  reinforced underground tunnels,  they  have  no  way
to  evade  the  500-pound and  750-pound  bombs."
—AP  in  Christian  Science  Monitor  Dec. 3.
"Most  of  the  large  Viet  Cong  and  North Vietnamese
units  which  operate  in  South  Vietnam  are  warned  of
the  imminence  of  a  B-52  raid  about  two  hours  before
they  take  place."
—Le  Monde,  p.  24,  Nov.  30,  quoting   U.S.   officers    in
the  high  plateau  regions  who  say  Soviet  trawlers  off
Guam  flash  a warning  when  the  B-52s  set   off.     It  takes
the  B-52  four  hours  to  reach  Vietnam  while  the  warn-
ing  can  be spread  in  two  hours.    A  U.S.  Colonel  King-
ston  is  quoted  by  the  Agence  France  Presse  as  saying
this   is   why   they   never   find   corpses   on   the   ground
after   a  B-52  raid  but  only  in  tunnels  or  shelters  where
there  has  been  a  direct   hit.
* It  is  indicative  that  Jeune  Afrique,  the  Tunisian publica-
tion  which  is  "the  third  world's"  best  weekly,  runs  a  comic
strip  "Seraphina  Centre  Octagone"  which  relates  the  adven-
tures  of  a  secret  agent  fighting  the  "Octogon."  The  Octogon,
modelled  on  the  Pentagon,  is  the  HQ of  the  SAR—the  Soviet-
American Republic!
the   Secretary  General's   revelation   at   a  diplomatic   luncheon
given  him   by  the  Egyptians  Dec.   6  that   even   some   of   his
"very  close  colleagues  and  well-meaning  friends"   had   doubts
about  the  propriety  of  his  changing  his  mind.
Our  own  faith  in  U  Thant  as  a  man  of  the  purest  devotion
gives  us  faith  in  his  decision.    The  plea  that  the  organization
might  be  irreparably  damaged  by  a  fight  over  the  finding  of  a
successor   must  have  weighed   heavily  with  him,   as  well   as
the  enhanced  authority offered  him  for  his  personal  initiatives
as  Secretary  General.    It  was no  mean  achievement  in  the  den
of  wolves which  is world  power  politics that  this  obscure  civil
servant  from  one  of  the  world's  smallest  countries  should  have
won  so  pivotal  a  position   in  this  precarious  and   limited  at-
tempt   at   a   world   government.      He   has   proven   himself
worthy  of  his  lonely  and   frustrating   post.     When   he   told
the  General  Assembly,  "I  shall  seize  every  occasion  to  recall
that  this  war  must  be  ended,"  these—from   him—were  not
empty  words.
Land  Reform  Rejected  by  South Vietnam's Landlord  Dominated  Constituent Assembly
Land  reform  was  supposed  to  have  been  given  top  prior-
ity   at  the  Honolulu  and  Manila  conferences.     It  has  just
been  overwhelmingly rejected  by  South  Vietnam's new  Con-
stituent   Assembly,  but  with  little  attention  from   the   U.S.
In  the  Christian  Science  Monitor  (Dec.  1)  Dr.  Phan  Quang
Dan,  a  Harvard  educated  physician,  was  quoted  as  telling
the   Assembly,   "We  must   have  a   clear   land  reform  pro-
gram.    Otherwise the  Communists will  win."   Dr.  Dan  said
that  before  the  war  the  rice  sharecroppers  were  "oppressed
by  the  landowners"  and   fear  their  return.   One  of  his  few
supporters  explained,  "Land  reform  is  most  needed  in  the
Mekong  Delta,  but  most  of  the  delegates   from  that  region
are  large  landowners.    About  ten  of   them  own  over  1,000
hectares   [2500  acres]   each."
The  proposal  was  to  give  every  peasant  the  constitutional
right  to  the  land  he  is  now  tilling.  "Although  'land  to  the
tiller'  is  the  Viet  Cong  chief  rallying  cry  among  the  80  per-
cent   landless   peasantry   of   the   Mekong   Delta,"  Richard
Oitchfield  reported in  the  Washington  Star  Dec.  1, the only
other  paper  we  saw  which  paid  any  attention  to  the  story,
"the  measure  got  only  three  votes."    This  will  make  the
"pacification"  of  the  Delta  more  difficult.    A  lot  of  Ameri-
can  boys  will  die  in  an  effort  to  restore  these  landlords.  The
U.S.  Embassy  is  expert  at  alerting  the  press  when  it  wants
to,  but  made  no  effort   to  focus  attention  on  this   vote.
The  same  Critchfleld  dispatch  said  the  Embassy  had  been
"actively  encouraging"  the  Assembly  to  draft   a  Constitu-
tion  like  South  Korea's  where  the  military   rule  behind  a
civilian  facade.    But  the  Assembly  though  reactionary  has
a  civilian  majority  and  voted  to  bar  the  military  from  ac-
tive  politics  and  to  adopt  an  American-style  Constitution.
Three  days  after   this  vote,  the   military  junta  announced
(UPI   in  Washington   Post   Dec.   4)   that  it   was   rejecting
the  Assembly's  demand  that  the  military  give  up  its   veto
power  over  any  proposed  new  Constitution.  This  is  how  we
bring  freedom  to  South Vietnam.
I     6        i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  December  12, 1966
A  Half  Century  Ago  the  Country  and  the  Court  Were  Much  Less  Jeffersonian
The  Bond  Decision  Upholds  Opposition  to  the  War  as Free  Speech
The  Julian  Bond  suit  was  the  first  free  speech  case  to  reach
our  highest  court  involving  opposition  to  the  Vietnamese  war.
It  was  also  the  first  time  that  the  Supreme  Court  passed  on
the  right  of  state  legislatures  to  determine the   qualifications
of  their  own  members.    The  State of  Georgia,  in  arguing  the
right  of  its  legislature  to  exclude  Bond   because  he  supported
SNCC  in  opposing  the  war,  relied  on  the  principles  of  Fed-
eralism  and  of   the  separation  of   powers   between  legislature
and  judiciary.    Georgia  argued  that  its  legislature had  a  right
to  be  the  final  judge  of  the  qualifications  of   its  members.
Madison's   Wise  Foresight
The   Court,   in   rejecting   these   arguments,   relied   on   the
views  of  Madison  in  the  framing   of   the  Constitution.     He
successfully   opposed   a  proposal  to  give  Congress   power   to
establish  qualifications  for  its  members.    He  cited  British  Par-
liamentary  experience to  show  how  easily  this could  be  abused
to  bar  new  members  whose  views  the  majority  disliked.  The
Court  held  that  for  Georgia's  legislature  to  exclude  Bond  be-
cause  of  his  views  on   the  war  would  be  a  violation  of   the
First  Amendment and  his  freedom  of  speech.
This  unanimous  decision,  by  Chief  Justice  Warren,   reflects
a  half  century's  progress  in  civil  liberties.    In  World  War   I,
the  only  Socialist  in  Congress,  Victor  Berger  of  Milwaukee,
was  expelled  for  opposing  the  war.    In  the  period  of  anti-
Red   hysteria   which   followed,   five   Socialists  were   expelled
from  the  New  York  State  legislature.   Charles Evans  Hughes,
soon   to  become  a  Republican  Chief   Justice  of   the  Supreme
Court,  defended   their  rights  in  vain.     Earl  Warren,  another
Republican  Chief  Justice, has  in  a  similar  situation  forced  the
Georgia  legislature  to  seat  Julian  Bond.
There   are   few   countries  where   free   traditions   are   deep
enough   to   allow   in   war-time   the   kind   of   criticism  SNCC
voiced  and  Bond  endorsed.    SNCC   said  the  U.S. had  been
deceptive  in  its  "concern  for  freedom  of  the  Vietnamese  peo-
ple,    just  as  the  government  has   been  deceptive  in  claiming
concern  for  the  freedom  of  colored  people  in  such  other  coun-
tries  as  the  Dominican   Republic,  the   Congo,-South   Africa,
Rhotksia  and  in  the  U.S. itself."    It  also  said,  "We   recoil
What   "Food  for  Freedom"   Means
Wider  attention   should  be  called  to  President   John-
son's  plan  to  change  the  name  Food  for  Peace  to  Food
for   Freedom.     To  link  food  to   "freedom"   as   Johnson
interprets  it  is  to  use  hunger   as  a  level   in  favor  of
"free  enterprise."    Behind  his  strange  and  cruel  reluc-
tance  to  commit  himself  on  the  additional   grain  India
desperately   needs  for  a  famine  already  begun  is  John-
son's  insistence  that  India  deal  with  U.S.  oil  companies
for  new  fertilizer  plants  instead  of  building  them  under
public   ownership.    The  reality   is   that   India  has  too
much  of  this  "freedom"  already;  we  cannot   remember
an   Indian  famine  which  was   not   aggravated    by   the
freedom'its  speculators  and  money-lenders   enjoy.   John-
son  had  better  begin  to  worry  more  about  the  contrast
with  China.    Isolated   and  without  foreign   aid,  U.S. or
Soviet  (India  has  both),  China  has  met  its  food  needs
in   the   same   drought   years   without  famine.    That   is
really   "self-help"   but  not  the   kind   the   White   House
likes.     That   contrast  may  make  a  new  generation  in
India   feel   that   "freedom"   is   only   freedom   to  starve.
That's  not  the   whole   story,   but  distended   bellies  are
indifferent   to   debate.
with  horror  at  the  inconsistency of  a  supposedly  'free'  society
where  responsibility for  freedom  is  equated  with  the  responsi-
bility  to  lend  oneself  to  military  aggression."    This  was  no
mild  murmur  of  disagreement.
The  Georgia  House  voted  184  to  12  that  any  man  holding
such  views  could   not  honestly  take  the  oath   to  uphold   the
Constitution.    The   Supreme   Court   ruled   that  the  power   to
exact  the  oath  could  not  be  used  "to  restrict  the  right  of  legis-
lators  to  dissent  from  national  or  state  policy  under  the  guise
of   judging  their   loyalty  to   the   Constitution."     In   a  world
where  most  of  the  newly  "liberated"  countries  of  Asia  and
Africa   allow  no  dissent  whatever,  and   the  European   Soviet
states  are  barely  beginning  to  allow  a  little  feeble  disagree-
ment,  this  is  a  decision  to  make  Americans  proud.     Jefferson
isn't  dead  yet,  despite  our  dirty  little  war  and  our  huge  mili-
tary  bureaucracy.    We  can  still  spit  in  their  eye.
The  Weekly  Is  An  Ideal  Gift  for  the  Man  Who  Has  Everything  But the  Truth
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly        5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,   D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street ........................................................................................
City   .................................... Zip................   State....................
12/12/66
For  the  enclosed   $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name    ..............................................................................
Street      ......................................;..........'.......................................
City   ....................................  Zip................ State....................
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement   wished   Q
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
AS**-
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by   1.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5   in   the  U.S.:  $6   in   Canada;    $10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail  ratn:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED