I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966sep12.pdf

============================================================

The  Provocations Behind the Tonkin  Gulf   Clash  Two  Years  Ago, P.  3
Words  Meant  To  Blaze In  That  Darkness Where LBJ's Conscience Ought To  Be
"The  cruelty  of  this  war  and the  suffering  it  has  caused     war. .  .  .  The  tragic  error  is  being  repeated  of  relying  on
the  people  of  Vietnam  are  a  constant  reproach.  .  .  .  The     force  and military  means.  .  .  ."
pressure  of  events  is  remorselessly  leading  towards a  major                                              —U  Thant  announcing  his  retirement
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  27September   12,  1966»'       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
16   CENTS
The  Hidden  History  of the  Coming  War  in  Thailand
There  seems  to  be  animosity  at  both  ends  of  the   political
spectrum  in  the  Senate  to  the  Tonkin  Bay  resolution,   a  feel-
ing  that  the  Senate  was  conned.    At  the  second  session  of  the
hearings   Stennis  is  holding   on  the  overcommitment  of   U.S.
military  power  abroad,  he  was  irritated  when  Secretary  Rusk
brought  up  the  resolution  as a  constitutional  basis  for  the  war
in  Vietnam.    Stennis  said  he  thought  that  was  standing  "on
mighty  thin  ice."     The  Mississippian   seemed   to  think   Con-
gress  was  in  dereliction   of   its  constitutional   duty  when,   in
that  resolution,  it  gave  the  President   a  blank  check  for  war.
"I   am  a  guilty  party,"   Stennis  said  ruefully,  "if   anyone  is
guilty  on  the  Tonkin  Bay  resolution"   and  added  that  he  was
concerned  about  the  "precedent  it  may  set."    Next  day  Sena-
tor  Fulbright  expressed   similar  misgivings  after  Arthur  Syl-
vester,   the   Pentagon   information   chief,   refused   to   discuss
Thailand  in  public.    "I  feel,"  Fulbright  said,  "that  I  was led
into the Tonkin  Bay incident,  and  I  only have  myself  to  blame
for  it  because  I  should  have  been  more  intelligent   and  more
far-seeing  and  more  suspicious."    Then  he  added  cryptically,
"Now   we  are  faced  with  what  looks  like  it  might  be  repeti-
tious. ..."
The  Thais  Call  for  U.S.  Troops
The  repetition  to  which  Fulbright  referred  would  create  a
second   Vietnam  in  Thailand.    On  Meet  the  Press,  Sept.  4,
Wm.  P.  Bundy,  the  ex-CIA  man  who  is  now  Assistant  Sec-
retary  of   State  for  Far  Eastern   Affairs,   tried  to  belittle  the
danger  of  direct  U.S.  combat  against  the  guerrillas   operating
in  Northeast  Thailand.    He  claimed  that  our  role  is  limited
to  equipment   and  training.     But  then   Philip   Geyelin,   the
Wall   Street   Journal's   knowledgeable   foreign   policy   expert,
wanted  to  know  "Hasn't  the  Embassy out  there  asked  us  to
go  a little  beyond  that  role?"    Mr.  Bundy's reply was  evasive.
"Well,"  he  said,  "I  wouldn't  want  to  comment  on  possibil-
ities  that  may  have  been  suggested   within  the   Government
but  I  repeat,  our  major  role  is  in  equipment  and  training."
Next   morning  Marquis  Childs  reported   in  the   Washington
Post  that  the  Thai  government  is  pressing  for  American  heli-
copters  and  American crews to help  "put  down  the  Communist
guerrillas  in  North  Thailand."
Mr.  Bundy  admitted  publicly  for  the  first  time  that  our
"basic  strength"  in  Thailand  is  now  "about  25,000."    That
figure,  it  is  disturbing  to  recall,  is  at  least   5,000  more  than
the  number  we  had  in  South  Vietnam  at  this  time  two  years
How  to  Keep  U  Thant  at  the  UN
Lyndon  Johnson  has  it  in  his  power  by  a  single  tele-
phone  call  to  keep U  Thant  as  Secretary  General  of  the
UN.    The  President  could  prove  the  sincerity  of   his
appeals  that  U  Thant  remain  in  office  by  taking  two
steps  which  U  Thant  believes  indispensable  to  the  res-
toration  of  peace  and  of  the  UN's  effectiveness.    One
would   be  to   announce  that   in  answer  to   U   Thant's
prayers  the  United  States  was  calling  off  the  bombard-
ment  of  North  Vietnam  and  asking  him  to  begin  new
talks  with  Hanoi  on  mutual  withdrawal  of   U.S.   and
North  Vietnamese  troops  in  the  context  of  internation-
ally   supervised   elections   in   South  Vietnam,  with  all
parties  including  the  Viet  Cong  invited  to  participate.
The  other  step  would  be  to  announce  that  the  United
States  would  make a  major  contribution to  the  univer-
sality   U  Thant  sees  as  urgent  for  the  UN  by  with-
drawing   American   objections   to   Communist  China's
admission,  leaving   the   difficult   problem  of   Formosa's
seat  to  the  General  Assembly.
(Continued  on  Page   Four)
ago.    It  was  not  reassuring  when  Mr.  Bundy  said  the  insur-
gency  in  Thailand  "is  on  a  very  limited  scale ...  on  a  scale
that  on  the   Vietnamese   benchmark   would   be  perhaps   the
level  of  '59  or  "60."   That  is  when  Diem  began  to  call  for
help.    This  is  a  good  time  to  recall  that  Thailand   is  more
than  three  times  the  size  of  South  Vietnam  and  has  twice  as
many  people.    If   300,000   men  are  too  few  to  subdue   the
guerrillas  in  South  Vietnam,  several  times  as  many  may  not
be  enough   in  Thailand.
Fulbright  said  he  was  dropping   his  hearings  on  informa-
tion  policy  to  focus  attention  on  Thailand.    We  believe  that
if   he  goes   back  and   takes  a  fresh  look  at  the  Tonkin   Bay
affair,  he  will  find  the  two  closely  related.    I  thought  at  the
time  that  the  Tonkin  Bay  affair  was  a  phoney,  and  tried  to
alert  readers  to  the  evidence  of  this.*    I  am  presenting   some
new  evidence  this  week  of  the  provocations  which  led  up  to
the  Tonkin   Bay  incidents.    Stennis  said  the   resolution  was
aimed   to  counter   aggression   against   the  United   States,   not
Vietnam.    But  operative  paragraph  (2)   contains  a  "sleeper"
saying  the  U.S.  is  prepared   "as  the  President   determines"   to
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
*  See  the  special  Aug.  24,  1964,  issue  of  this  Weekly,  as
reprinted  at  p.  307  of  Raskin and  Fall's  Vietnam  Reader,  and
the  p.  1  box  "War  Behind Our  Backs,"  Aug  10,  1964.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  12,  1966
{Continue!  from   Page  One)
use  its  armed  forces  in  aid  of  any  member  of  SEATO   "re-
questing  assistance  in  defense  of  its  freedom."    Thailand  is
a  member of  SEATO,  and  under this  clause Johnson can  send
troops  at  Thailand's  request  without resorting  to our  "consti-
tutional   process"  as   specified   in  the   SEATO  treaty.    This
blank  check  for  trouble  is  what  we  were  warned  against  by
Morse  and  Gruening, the  only  two  members  of  Congress who
voted  against  the  resolution.
The  Tonkin  Bay  affair   shows  how  adept  the  Johnson  ad-
ministration  is  at  blowing  up  minor  forays  into  international
crises  when  it  suits  its  purpose.    It  could on  the  same  model
wait  for  a  guerrilla  stab  at  one  of  our  air  bases  in  Thailand
and  then  cry  out  that  we  were  the  victims  of  unprovoked
aggression  in  violation  of  the  UN  Charter,  the   Nuremberg
laws  and  Roberts'  Rules  of  Order.    Mr.  Geyelin  on  TV  asked
Mr.  Bundy  whether  the  situation   was  not  like  that  earlier
in  Vietnam  when  guerrillas  attacked   U.S.  air  bases  and  more
troops  were  sent  in  to  defend  the  bases  and  then  "to   chase
the  guerrillas that  were  attacking  the  air  bases."   Mr. Bundy
replied  with  the  air  of  a  deeply  aggrieved   man,  "the   Thai
are  absolutely  determined  to  deal  with  this  themselves."   If
they  are  so  "absolutely   determined"  why  are  they   already
calling  for  help?
When  Goldwater  Was  Right
It  is  clear  that  we  are  dealing  in  the  government  with  a
crew  of  consummate  fabricators.     The  foremost  of  them  we
are  sorry  to  say  is  Lyndon  Johnson   himself.    The  truest
words  spoken  in  the  1964 campaign  were  in  poor  Barry  Gold-
water's  remark  that  Johnson  was  "the  biggest  faker  in  the
country."   Any  thoroughgoing  Senate  inquiry  into  the  Thai-
land  situation  must  ask  how so clever  and  sweeping  a  resolu-
tion  as  the  Tonkin  Bay  resolution  came  to  be  trotted  out  so
swiftly  in  the  Tonkin  Bay  affair.    The  first  question  to  be
asked  is  when  and  under  what  conditions  did  Thailand  agree
to  permit  U.S.  air  bases  on  its  soil  for  the  bombardment  of
Laos  and  North  Vietnam, in  clear  violation  of  the  most  ele-
mentary  international  law.    To  permit  U.S.  air  activity  was
to  risk  retaliation  from  its  Communist  neighbors.   The  Thais
are   not  given  to  such  adventurism  without  firm  guarantees
and  quid  pro  quos.
An   urgent  question  the  Thais  must  have  raised  is  what
would  happen  if  China  and  its  neighbors  retaliated  by  send-
ing  in  guerrillas  or  even  openly  invading.    Our  first  answer
must  have  been  that  the  Thais  could  invoke  our  aid  under
A  Fond  Memory—But  It  Never  Happened
"How  deeply Mr. Johnson feels  on  this  subject  [mini-
mum  wages]  was  made  movingly  clear  in  the  chat  he
had  with  reporters  in  Texas  on  his  58th  birthday.   He
recalled  that  his  first  real  battle  as  a  Congressman  in
1938   had  been  to   force  consideration  of   the  original
Fair  Labor  Standards Act,  with  its  hourly  pay  floor  of
25   cents."
—New  York  Times  editorial, Sept.  2
The  trouble  with  this  Jack-The-Giant-Killer   picture
is that  Johnson  was  a  freshman  Congressman  when  the
bill  came  up.   The  Congressional  Record  shows  he  took
no  part  in  the  floor  debate,  nor  dM  he  appear  at   the
joint hearings  held  on S  2475, which was  substituted  for
the  House  bill,  HR  8580.    He  voted  for  the  final  meas-
ure,  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  "forced   consider-
ation"  of  the  bill.    Even  his  most  laudatory   campaign
biographers   never  claimed  he  played  any  special  part
in  enacting  minimum  wage  legislation.
the  SEATO  treaty.   But  that  treaty  was one of  John  Foster
Dulles's  most  tricky  contraptions.  To get  Britain  and  France
to sign,  he had to agree that no military  action  could  be  taken
under  it  without  unanimous  agreement.     To  get  the  treaty
past  the  Senate  (where  only  Langer  voted  against  it),  he had
to  include a  phrase  which  says  military  action  would  not  be
automatic  but  would  be  taken  only in  accord  with  our   "con-
stitutional  processes",  i.e.  after  a  declaration  of  war  by  Con-
gress.    The  astute  and  wily  Thais  must  have   asked  what
would  happen  if  Congress  refused   to  vote  a  declaration  of
war?    The  Tonkin  Bay  resolution  gave  Johnson   the   blank
check  he  needed  to  pay  for  bases  in   Thailand.
Now   let   us  turn   back   to  events   in   South   Vietnam   in
1964.    General  Khanh  and  Air  Marshal  Ky  were  asking  for
"bac  tien"—a  march  north,  presumably   to  invigorate  Viet-
namese  army  morale.    Our  people  in  Saigon  feared  a  march
north  would  lead  to  the  collapse  of  Southern  forces.    If  they
couldn't  deal  with  ill-equipped  guerrillas  in  the   South,  how
would  they  fare  against  Giap's  fresh  troops  in  the   North?
The  committee  will  find  we  believe  that  to  appease  Khanh
and  Ky we  promised  instead  to  bomb the  North  and  to  widen
commando  raids  against  it.     But  for   effective   bombing  of
the  North  by  jet  bombers,  Danang  was  too  far.    The  nearest
point  was  northeastern  Thailand,  where  we  put  our  bases.
The Fullest Report on How the Other Side Sees the  Way to Peace
"At   the  core  of  Hanoi's  position,  a  source  close   to  the
Vietnamese  Communists  explained today  is  that  the  demand
that   U.S.  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam  be  'uncondi-
tionally  terminated' before  any  discussion of  a  Vietnam  set-
tlement  can  be  undertaken.   [Nguyen]  Thuong  [the  senior
North  Vietnamese  diplomat  who  delivered  a  personal  mes-
sage  from  Ho  Chi  Minh]  is  believed  to  have  stressed   this
point  in  his  talks  with  de  Gaulle  this  afternoon.  .  .  .
"Further   outlining   Hanoi's  position,  Thuong  is   said   to
have  emphasized  that  his  government  favors  the  withdraw-
al  of   all  foreign  troops  from  South  Vietnam  so  that  'the
Vietnamese   people   can  settle   their   problems   themselves.'
A  source close  to  Thuong explained today  that  Hanoi  wants
'a  return  to  1960, when  all  we  had  in  South  Vietnam  was  a
civil  war  between  the  Saigon  government and  the  National
Liberation  Front.'    Under  these  circumstances the  Libera-
tion  Front  would  be  amenable to  the  formation  of  a  coali-
tion  government  with  South  Vietnamese civilian  politicians.
"Elaborating   on   this   point,   the   source   explained  that
Hanoi's  insistence  on  recognition  of  the  Viet  Cong  as  the
'sole  representative of  the  South  Vietnamese people'  can  be
negotiated.    He  also  stated  that   Hanoi's  demand  for   the
withdrawal  of   U.S.   forces  from   South  Vietnam  is  not  a
'precondition'   for   negotiations.     With   rare   candor,   the
source   acknowledged   the   presence   of   North  Vietnamese
troops  in  the  South,  asserting   that  'they   did  not  commit
aggression,   as   Mr.  Dean   Rusk   claims,  but  responded  to
American  aggression'."
—Stanley  Karnow  from  Pnom Penh, Wash.  Post, Sept. 1
"French   diplomatic   sources,   presumably  reflecting   con-
versations  held  here with  representatives of  North Vietnam
and  South  Vietnam's National  Liberation  Front,  suggested
today  that  the  Communists  might  accept  a  two-year period
as  a  'reasonable'  time  for   the  proposed  U.S.  troop  with-
drawal.    These  sources  also  indicate  that,  should  the  U.S.
formally   announce  its   commitment  to  such  a  withdrawal,
the  Vietnamese Communists  would  not  insist  upon  a  cessa-
tion  of   hostilities  as   a   prelude   to  negotiations  aimed  at
settling   the  Vietnam  war.    It  was  recalled  that  talks  to
end  the  Korean  war  began  before  a  truce."
—Karnow  from  Pnom  Penh,  Washington  Post,  Sept.  3
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  12,  1966
The  Crisis  Came  in  Handy
A  re-examination   of  the  Tonkin  Bay  affair   by  the   Sen-
ate   Foreign   Relations  committee  will  show  that  it   served
three  purposes.    It  gave  Johnson  the  blank  check for  war  he
needed  to  negotiate  the  use  of  Thai  bases  for  bombing.    It
enabled  him  to  satisfy  the  cries  coming from  Khanh  and  Ky
that  the  U.S.  by  some  strong  action  show that  it  was  not  "a
paper  tiger."   It  also  gave  Johnson  a  chance  to.steal  some
of   Goldwater's   thunder   in  the   Presidential   campaign.     It
would  be  interesting  to  know whether  the  resolution  had  ac-
tually  been  drafted   before   the  events  in  Tonkin  Bay.
Fulbright,  talking  to  reporters  after  the  Sylvester  hearing
last  week,  said  that  his  committee  had  no more  than  a  short
• executive  session  with  Rusk  before  being  asked  to  put   the
Tonkin  resolution  through  the  Senate.    "It  came  down,"  he
said,  "to  the  question  of  whether  the  attack  was  provoked
or  unprovoked. . .  ."   Fulbright's  shrug  of the  shoulders im-
plied  that  he  was  dubious now of  Rusk's  assurances  that  the
attacks  were  unprovoked.   Even  at  the  time,  judging  by odd
items  in  the  U.S.  press,  there  was  indication  that  the  North
Vietnamese  were  being  harassed   by  commando  and   naval
raids  from   South  Vietnam  and  that  our  naval  vessels  were
shielding  the  raiders.    This  provoked  the  clash.
A  copy  of  the  Saigon  Post  for  July  23,  1964,  which  has
just  come  into  our  hands  and  is  reproduced  in  a  box  on  the
bottom  of  this  page  shows  how extensive  was  the  damage  be-
ing  claimed  for  these  commando raids  less  than  two  weeks
before  the  Tonkin  Bay  incidents.   The  details  on  the  damage
being  done  by  the  raids  were  not  reported  either  in  the  New
York   Times  or  the  Washington  Post  accounts  of  Ky's  press
conference,  perhaps   because  information   officers   in   Saigon,
faced  with  Ky's  embarrassing  disclosure  of  commando  raids
on  the  North,  and  unable  to  deny  them,  adopted  the  tactic
of   disparaging   their  results.    But  even  unsuccessful  raids
must  have  been  enough  to  make  the  North  Vietnamese  nerv-
ous,  and  if  the  raids  were  only  half   as  successful  as   Ky
claimed,  they  were  enough to  put  the  North  on guard  against
intruding  planes  and  naval  ships.    Only  a  few  days  before
the  U.S.  destroyer  Maddox  was  fired  on  in  the  Gulf  of  Ton-
kin,  Aug.  2,  North  Vietnam  complained to  the   International
Control  Commission  (New  York   Times,  July  29,  1964)  that
U.S.  and  South  Vietnamese  warships  had  intruded   into   its
territorial  waters  and  carried   away   11  North   Vietnamese
fishermen.
The  knowledge  of  these  covert  activities  may  explain  why
the  first  reports  from  the  Pentagon   played  down  the  attack
on  the   Maddox.    "Defense   Department   officials,"   the   New
York   Times  reported   Aug.  3,  1964,  "described   the   incident
as  unwelcome but  not  especially  serious"  and  next  day  it
reported,   again   from   military   sources,  that  "destroyers  on
patrol  have  sometimes  collaborated   with   South   Vietnamese
hit-and-run   raids  on  North   Vietnamese  cities,   though   the
destroyers   themselves  stay   in  international   waters."    But
there  was  no  discussion  of  the  trouble  which  might  arise  be-
Slippery  Fellow
Sen.  SYMINGTON:   Is  it  not  a  fact  that  for  many
years  one  of  the  basic  arguments  for  the  foreign  mil-
itary  program has  been  that  it  costs  the  U.S.  much  less
to   train   and   equip   foreign   soldiers   than   American
soldiers?
Secretary   RUSK:  That  is  one of  the  points  that  has
been  brought  out.
SYMINGTON:    Is  it  not  also  a  fact  that  with  the
exception  of  Koreans,  no  troops  of  any  nation  that  has
received  assistance  from  the  U.S.  has  even  token  fight-
ing  forces  in Vietnam?
RUSK:  Well,  if  you  exclude Thailand  and  the  Philip-
pines  because  of  size,  and,  after  all  the  Thais—
SYMINGTON:     The   Philippines   have   no   combat
troops.    I  will  check  the  Thailand   figure.   I  got  my
figures  from  the  Pentagon.   I  was  surprised  at   your
answer  because  they   said   all  Thais  were  non-combat
troops.   I  am  talking  about  fighting  forces.
RUSK:  I  think  that  is  correct,  sir,  except  that  I  do
think  we ought  not  to  leave  out  South   Vietnam.
—Stennis hearings  on  U.S. overcommitment, Aug. SO
Unless, of course, its  desertion  rate  goes  much higher.
cause  North  Vietnam  has  a  12-mile  limit  while  we  recognize
only  a  3-mile  limit.    Hanoi  radio   (NYT   Aug.  15)  admitted
the  Aug.  2  attack  on  the  Maddox  but  said  "Our  boats  came
into  action  to  protect  our  territorial  waters  and  our  people
and  to  chase  the  enemy ship  out  of our  waters."   A  Washing-
ton  story   in  the   same   issue   said   there  had   been  an   in-
crease  in  raiding  activities  "in  recent  weeks" and that  "many
American  naval  advisers"  were  going  to  sea  with  the  South
Vietnam  raiders.
So  much  can  be  learned  just  by  a  cursory  check  of  a  few
newspapers.    Senators  on  the  Foreign  Relations   Committee
ought  to  be  able  to  find  out  why  the  White  House  seemed  to
take   the   Maddox   affair   so  much  more   seriously   than   the
lower  level  Defense  Department   officials  with  whom  report-
ers  first  spoke.   There  was a  high  level  meeting  at  the  White
House  Aug.  2 attended  by  LBJ,  Rusk,  Ball,  Cyrus  Vance  and
General  Wheeler,  then  chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,
"and    other   top   military   and   diplomatic   representatives"
(N.Y.   Times,  Aug.  3,  1964).   That  seems  a  lot  of  high  brass
for  so  minor  an  incident  unless  plans  were  then  laid  to  ex-
ploit  it.    Next  day  Johnson  called  in  the  press  and  issued  a
"shoot  to  kill"  order  in  case  of  further  attacks  but  refused
to  take  questions.    The  same  day  the  giant  aircraft  carrier,
Constellation,  and three  other warships,  steamed  out  of  Hong
Kong  (AP  in  Wash.  Star  Aug.  4),  bound  as  it  turned   out
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
The  Provocations  Behind  the  Tonkin  Gulf  Clashes
"Air   Commander  Nguyen  Cao  Ky  told  newsmen  at   the
Bien  Hoa  air  base  there  has  been  an  overall  40 percent  in-
crease   in  air  operations   aimed  at  sending  Special   Forces
teams  in  North  Vietnam.   The  official   admission  came  as
unconfirmed   reports  by  Vietnamese  sources  told   of  wide-
spread   explosions   rocking  industrial  centers  and  harbor
areas  in  North  Vietnam  since  July  10.
"I   cannot   assure  that   all  provinces  of  North  Vietnam
would  be  bombed,  but  at  least  Hanoi  should  be  destroyed,'
the  young  Air  Force  chief  said,  as  he  revealed  that  Viet-
namese  pilots  are  being  trained  to  carry  out  special  mis-
sions  in  North Vietnam.
"Vietnamese  sources  yesterday   said  that  widespread  ex-
plosions, attributed   to  the  work  of  South  Vietnamese  com-
mando  units, have  destroyed  key  industrial  and  harbor  tar-
gets  in  North  Vietnam  since  July  10.   (Italics  added).
"The   sources  said   that   South  Vietnamese commandoes
blew  up  one  end  of  the  Swing  bridge  in  Haiphong  on  July
14,  including  an  adjacent  warehouse, causing  an  interrup-
tion  of  traffic  whereby  vehicles  had  to  be  detoured   through
Kien  An.   At  the  warehouse, the  sources  said,  the  explosion
seriously  damaged  the   propeller  of  a  Communist  Chinese
freighter,   killing   an  estimated   100  laborers,  including  14
Red  Chinese  crewmen.
"In  his  briefing  yesterday,  Air  Commander  Ky  said  the
U.S.  has  no commitment to  train  Vietnamese  jet  pilots,  but
said  that  Thai  officials  have agreed  in principle  to  help  train
Vietnamese  jet  pilots."             —Saigon  Post,  July  23,  1964
1   1  .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, September  12, 1966
Either  A  Hoax  or  the  Mildest   Attack  the  U.S. Navy  Ever   Suffered
(Continued  from  Page   Three)
later for  Tonkin Bay.   At  11:30  p.m. that  night Johnson  was
on  a  nationwide  TV  broadcast  announcing that  a  second  at-
tack  had  been  made  on U.S.  destroyers  and  that  he  had  or-
dered  retaliatory  raids  on  North   Vietnam.    Hanoi  claimed
this  second  attack  was  a  hoax.   The  U.S.  admitted  that  in
the  second  attack,  like  the  first,  there  had  been  no  damage
or  casualties.   If  the  second  attack  really  happened,  it  was
by  our  own  account  the  mildest  ever  suffered   by  the U.S.
Navy.
Like  Stampeding Steers  in  Texas
Yet  Johnson  played  this  to  the  hilt  as  if  it  were  an  inter-
national  crisis.   On August  5, he  characteristically   chose  the
dedication  of  a  new  centre  at   Syracuse  for  "better  under-
standing   among   all  men" to   deliver   a   bellicose   address.
He  described   the  supposed  Tonkin  Bay  attacks  as   "unpro-
voked  .  .  .  deliberate,  wilful,   systematic  aggression"  which
had  to  be  answered  with  "action."    In  the  wave  of  excite-
ment   generated,   he   then   put   his   blank   check   resolution
through  Congress  in  less  than  48  hours.   House  and  Senate
were  stampeded  like  a  bunch  of  steers  in  a  Texas  roundup.
That's  how  Johnson  got  the  authority  he  may  soon  use  to
put  U.S~ combat  troops  into- Thailand.    And that's  the  story
on  which  Fulbright  ought  to  put  the  spotlight.
At  the  Geneva  conference   in  1954, the  French  agreed
to withdraw  their  forces  within  two  years.  All  de  Gaulle
proposed  at  Pnom  Penh  is  that,  as  an  earnest  of  good
faith,  we  set  forth  in  advance  the  withdrawal  time  for
our   own   troops.    This   would   (as   in   1954)  begin,  of
course,  after   peace  negotiations  had  ended,  not    before—
as  some  silly  American  editorial  writers  have  protested
in  their  usual  anti-de  Gaullist  frenzy.    Since  we   keep
saying  that  we  will  withdraw  when  a  satisfactory    peace
has  been  negotiated,  why  not  set  a  withdrawal  time  in
advance,  as  a means  of   getting  talks  started? . . . Even
if   there  had   been  freedom  of  campaigning  and   no   re-
striction  on  candidates,  the  South   Vietnamese  elections
would  still  be  a  fraud.     Under  the  rules  set  in  advance
by  the  military  for  the  constituent  assembly to  be  elected,
the  generals  may  rewrite  the  constitution  it  drafts   any
way  they  please and  only  a  two-thirds  vote  can override
them.     More   than  enough  military   candidates  will  be
elected  to  give  the  Generals the  one-third veto  they  need^
. . . More  on both subjects  next  week*
(Continued  from  the  box  on Page  One)
In  the  absence  of  any  Johnson  move  in  either  direc-
tion,  U  Thant  is  asked  to  continue an  exercise  in  stulti-
fication.   To  enjoy  the  fruits  of  a  high  office  in  which
he  cannot  do  his  duty  to  humanity  in  so  fateful  a  time
must  seem  to  as  truly  religious  a  man  and  a  Buddhist
as  U  Thant  morally  repulsive.    He  must  see  mockery
in   the  very  words  with   which  Ambassador  Goldberg
pleaded  with  him to  remain.   The latter  asserted  again
that  the  U.S.  was  prepared  to  withdraw its  forces  from
Vietnam  "as  soon  as  the  people  there  are  enabled  to
determine  their  own  future  without  external   interfer-
ence."   But  the  greatest  source  of  external  interference
is  the  American military  occupation itself!
Similarly,   while  Mr.  Goldberg   said   that   the  U.S.
shared  U Thant's  "dissatisfaction  . . . that  the Organi-
zation  has  not   yet   achieved  universality   of  member-
ship," he  added  in  the  tricky  and  unctuous  phraseology
of  the  State  Department  that  the  U.S. would  "welcome
the  day" when  the  UN  includes  "all  genuinely  inde-
pendent  States  which  are  committed- to  the  principles
of  the  Charter."   This  means  in  practice  that  the U.S.
goes on  using  its  vast  power to  determine who is  genu-
inely  independent  and  who  is  really-  committed  to  the
Charter.     These   are  the   supercilious  standards  used
since  Acheson's  day  to  block  universal membership  and
to  keep  Peking out.
The  truth  is  that  the  nation  least  committed to  the
principles  of  the  Charter  is the  United  States.   The  as-
sertion  of  a  right  unilaterally  to  intervene  anywhere
in  the. world we  feel  our  interests  or  ideology  calls  for
it  is  incompatible with  the  existence  of  a  world  organi-
zation.    Guatemala,  Cuba,  the  Dominican Republic and
Vietnam  represent   efforts   to  establish   a  Pax  Ameri-
cana  in  fundamental   conflict  with  the  Charter,  as  we
would  easily   recognize  if  some  other   power,  whether
Russia   or  Germany  or  Japan  were  sending  its  planes
and  troops  into  other  countries  to  enforce  its  will.
Remember  that  U  Thant  once  blurted  out  in  despair
that  the  American people, if  they knew  fhe truth, would
never   support  what  their   government  was  doing  in
Vietnam,  and  you  begin  to  get  some  conception  of  the
bitterness  that  lies  behind this  good  and  humane  man's
refusal  any  longer  to  acquiesce  in  the  lofty  impotence
to  which  U.S.  policy  consigns  him.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes—
Also  PLEASE  Send  in  Your  Zip   Numbers  Urgent
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Please  renew   (or   enter)
Name  ....................................
Street   ..................................
City  .......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5 send
(To)  Name  ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
....  Zip..........State......................
9/12/66
a  gift  sub to:
City  ........................................... Zip..........State......................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
Nebraska  Aye.,  M.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week  in  December  and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington, D.  C.   An  independent weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the   U.S.;   $6  in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mail  rates:
$15  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED