I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jan24.pdf

============================================================

Those  Non-Lethal  Gases  Can Be Lethal, P. 2
One  Stream  That  Keeps  on  Swelling
"Little  more  than  six  years  ago,  North  Vietnam  decided
on  conquest.    From  that  day  to  this,  soldiers  and  supplies
have   been   moving   from   North   to   South   in   a   swelling
stream...."
—Johnson  in  his  State  of  the  Union  Message,  Jan.  12.
"Gen.    Westmorland  stated  to  me  that  the  bulk  of   the
Victcong  fighting  in  South  Vietnam  were  born  and  reared
Is   The  Stream  of   Official  Falsification
in  South  Vietnam.   Gen. Stilwell,  in  Thailand,  went further.
He  stated  that  80  percent  of  the  Vietcong   fighting   in  the
Mekong  delta  area  south  of  Saigon,  were  born  and  reared
in   that   area.    They   were  not  infiltrators   or  Communists
from  the  North."
—Young   (D.  Ohio)  Jan.  H  in  the  first  Senate  speech  of
this  session  opposing  the  war  in  Vietnam.
1. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  3
JANUARY  24,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
How  to Win  Hanoi  and  Upset  Peking
In  diplomacy,  as  in  war,  nothing  is  so  effective  as  surprise.
The  opponent's  plans  and  tactics  are  geared  to  his observation
of  your  usual  conduct.    To  depart  from  it  is  to  throw  him  off
balance.     The   way  to  throw  the   enemies  of   negotiation   in
Peking  and   Hanoi  off  balance  is  to  do  the  unexpected—and
that  is,  first  of  all,  to  let  the  suspension  of  bombing  in   the
North  go  on,  week  after   week.    The  longer  the   suspension
continues  the  more  faith  builds up  at  home  and  abroad,  among
allies  and  neutrals,  that  Lyndon  Johnson  really  means  it  when
he  says  he  is  looking  for  peace.    If  the  bombings  resume,  the
peace  offensive  will  be  dismissed  as  a  phoney.    The   pressure
of  neutral capitals  on  Hanoi  to  talk  will  be ended.    The  bitter-
enders   in   the   NLF,   North   Vietnam  and   Peking   will   be
strengthened  in  their  argument  that  the  only  course  is  to  go
on  fighting,  no  matter  how  long,   until  we  are  driven  out  of
Southeast  Asia.   But  every  day  the  lull  continues begins  to  re-
build  that  credibility  the  whole  course  of  U.S.  policy  in  Viet-
nam  since  1954  has  been  destroying.    The  way  to  really  puz-
zle  Peking  is  to  make  it  look  more  and  more  as  if  we  really
may  be  sincere.
The  Esperanto  in  The  Cave  Man's  Club
We   are  accustomed   to  seeing  minor  conflicts  like  a  strike
drag  on  for  weeks  and  sometimes  months.    But  we  expect  far
more  complex  problems  like  the  Vietnamese  war  to  be  ended
overnight  by  a  gesture.    If  steel  magnates  and  steel  labor  can't
speak  the  same  language  easily,  how  can  we  expect  swift  un-
derstanding   between   tongues,   civilizations  and   ideologies   as
different  as Hanoi's  and  Washington's?  The  one  common  lan-
guage  in  such  disputes  is  the  common  language  of  the  hard-
liners  on  both  sides—each  insists all  the  other  understands  is
force.    This  is the  argument  on  both  sides  for  stepping  up  the
war  until   the  other   is  destroyed  or  surrenders.    This  is  the
^Esperanto  of  human   conflict   from  time  immemorial.    What
neither  side  understands  is  the  sudden  withdrawal  of   force.
If  the  bombings .are  still  suspended  when  Prime  Minister  Wil-
son   visits   Moscow  February   21,  Peking  will   have   cause   -to
worry,  lest  an  agreement   among  Moscow,   Hanoi   and  Wash-
ington   be   reached   in   Vietnam,  on   its   borders,   without   its
concurrence,  opening  the  way to  a  Russo-American  entente  and
the  isolation  of  China.    This  and  not  the  bombings  is  what
Peking   fears.
Second Thoughts  On Wall  Street
"It  is  not  enough,   although  true,  to  say  we  are  in
Vietnam  to  resist   Red  Chinese  expansion.    The  ques-
tion  that  has  to  be  tackled  before  too  long  is  whether
the  U.S.  is  inflicting  more  injury  on  the  Communists or
itself  on  this  particular  battlefield.   If  the  answer   is
that  the  Communists  are  getting  the  worse  of  it,  then
the  U.S.  can  go  about  its  business  and  take  in  stride
the  verbal  abuse  it  is  receiving at  home  and  abroad.  If
the  answer  is  that  the  U.S.  is  in  danger  of  damaging
itself   more  than  any  conceivable gains  would warrant,
then  the  national  interest   would require  a  re-examina-
tion  of  policy.   The  questions  grow  in  importance  .  .  .
because   Vietnam  policy  for  years  has  seemed  charac-
terized  by  drift.  .  .  .  Congress,  we  think,  should  make
its  contribution, in  the  hope  of  ensuring that  this  open-
ended  war  has  some  foreseeable  and  honorable  end."
—"The   Open   Ended    War",    lend   editorial    in   the
Wall  Street  Journal,  January    IS.
This  fear  will  have  to  be  allayed  if  there  is  to  be   peace
in  Asia.    That  is  why  we  applaud  the  Administration  for  the
feelers  toward  better  relations  it  has  begun  to  extend  toward
Peking—the  lifting  of  the  bars  on  the  visits  of  medical  men
to mainland  China,  the  offer  to admit Chinese newsmen if  ours
are  given  visas,  the  indication that  we  are  ready  to  discuss mu
tual  maritime  problems  and  the  unusual  demonstration  in   (lie-
Senate  on  a non-proliferation treaty.   Fifty-two  Senators,  a  ma-
jority,  join  an  Administration figure  like  Pastore,  chairman  of
the  Joint  Congressional  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  in sup-
porting  negotiations  to  which  Peking  has  been  invited.    The
Senate  demonstration  came  too  late  for  coverage  in  this  issue
but  it  showed  not  only  a  readiness  to  meet  Russian  fears  about
a   nuclear   Germany   but—equally   important—a   readiness  to
talk—and  co-exist—with  China.
A  suspicious  China,  fearful  of  attack,  sensitive to  any  slight
against  its  dignity,  grown   almost  paranoid  under  U.S.   "con-
tainment,"  must  sooner  or  later  respond  to  such  overtures  if
we  persevere.     The   reward  of  perseverance  may  be  the  lives
of  the  countless  sons and  grandsons  the  course toward  war with
China  would  ultimately  cost  us.    One  fact  few  observed  may
help  to  encourage  this  new  course.    The  Chinese  are  supposed
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  24,1966
Even A Cabinet Post Won't Heal The Wounds of New Anti-Negro Outrages ...
We  welcome  the  appointment  of   the  first  Negro   Cabinet
member.    The  confirmation  of  Robert  C.  Weaver   as  Secretary
of  Housing  ami  Urban  Development  will  encourage  the  small
Negro  upper  class  but  we  suspect  it  will  have  little  impact  on
the  Negro  masses.    The  gulf  between  them  is  deep.     Over-
shadowing   the  appointment  is  the  revelation  of   new   horror.
At  a  hearing Jan.   I  i  the  House  Un-American Activities  Com-
mittee  ended  the  mystery  which  surrounded  the  finding  of  the
deconi|x>sed  bodies  of  two  Negroes,  Charles  Moore  and  Henry
Dee,   in  a  Mississippi River  backwater  in  July  1954  while  au-
thorities  were  searching  for  the  three  civil  rights  workers  who
had  disappeared  near  Philadelphia, Miss.    A  paper  mill  work-
er  confessed  that  the  two  had  been  whipped  and  mutilated by
Klansmen  but  two  Klansmen  arrested   in  the  murder  were  re-
leased  by  a  Justice  of  the   Peace  without  even  being  taken  be-
fore  a  grand  jury.    No  one  knew  until  now  that  the  authori-
ties  had  a  confession.    Since  the  House  Committee   is  getting
most  of  this  material  from  the  I
;
BI,  some  member  of   Congress
ought  to  ask  why  J.  F.dgar  Hoover  did  not  bring  it  forcibly  to
public  attention  at  the  time.    He   is  articulate  enough   on  his
favorite  themes.    The  day  after  this  revelation,  there  was  an-
other  painful   scene  when  police  disrupted  a  memorial  march
in   Hattiesburg,   Miss.,   for   slain   civil   rights   leader,   Vernon
Dahmer     "Four  of  Dahmer's  six  sons,"  the  AP  reported   from
Hattiesburg   ( \Y'a.\h.  Post  Jan.   16),   "two   of   them   Air   Force
sergeants  and  two of  them  Army men,  were  among  the  mourn-
ers."     Negroes  may  feel  there  is  no  need   to  ship  such  Negro
soldiers  9,000  miles  away  if  we  are  so  intent  on   defending
democracy  against  terrorists.
I'rnm  Our  Neu'   Left   Io  Theirs:  American  anti-Communism
has   become   such   a   dirty   tool   that   it   is  hard   to   draw   the
attention  of  our  best  youth  to  the  real  injustices  of  the  Soviet
system.    Yet  the  young  people  who  had  the  nerve  to  demon-
strate  and  to  give  out   leaflets  in  Moscow  against  the  arrest  of
the  writers  Sini.ivski  and   Daniel  .ire  the  natural  counterparts
of  our  own  New   Left,   rebels- like  ours  against  moral   indiffer-
ence.     Now   Izrexlia   (Jan.   12)   has  published   a  bitter  attack
by  the  Secretary  General  of  the  Moscow   Union  of  Writers  on
the   two  arrested   men.     "It   seems,"   Le   Monde   commented
(an.  II.  "that  the  emotion  aroused  in  the  Soviet intelligentsia
Just  A  Farm  Boy's  Chore  Over  Vietnam
Ran  Me  Thuot,  Vietnam—Capt.  James  Wisby,  Tomah,
Wis,    studied   agriculture   at  the   University   of  Minne-
sota,  but  now  spends  much  of  his  time  helping  to  de-
stroy   crops.    Piloting  single-engine,   two-seater    planes
known  as  bird  dogs,  Wisby  and  seven  other  Air  Force
men  are  responsible   for  patrolling  10,000  square   miles
of   South   Vietnam.   One  of   their   principal  jobs   is   to
keep  close  check  on  farm  land  controlled  by  the  Viet
Cong.   If  it  appears  to  be  flourishing,  they   pinpoint   it
for  other  planes  which  destroy  it  with  bombs,  napalm
or  chemicals.    Wisby's   personal  plane  is  called  the  five
J's  after   his  family:  Jim,  himself;  Joanne,   his   wife;
Janet,  3;  Jeffrey,  7  months  and  Jeepers,  the  dog.  .  .  .
Wisby's  squadron  is  part  of  a  larger  force  of  Air  Force
bird  dogs,  120  of  them,  carrying  out  the  largest  jungle
watching  and  air  espionage   program  in  history.    Every
part  of  South Vietnam is  divided into  squares  which are
constantly  under  surveillance.    The  revolutionary  thing
about  the  program  is  its  combination of  intensive  visual
reconnaissance    and   immediate  striking    ability.     The
idea   came   from  Rand  Corp.   Tons  of  data  and  aerial
photographs   are   fed   into  electronic   computers   which
judge   the   results   and  suggest   improvements.
—The  Milwaukee  Journal,  January  16.
and   abroad   has   forced   Soviet   literary   functionaries  to   reveal
an   affair   they  would  have  preferred   to  pass  over  in  silence."
The   crime  is  to  have  published   abroad   under   the   name  of
Tertz  and  Arjak,  thus  eluding  Soviet  censorship.  The   students
who  demonstrated   for  them  were  asking  freedom  for   writers
and  for  a  public  trial.    Neither  is  at  all  likely  to  be  granted
unless  there  is greater  pressure   from  abroad.     It  would  be  an
act  of  solidarity  with  the  best  Soviet  youth  and  Soviet  writers
if   American  youth  leaders  and  writers  associated  with  peace
and  civil  rights  were  to  hold  a  protest  meeting  in  this  country.
To  cleanse  socialism  of  bureaucratic  authoritarianism  is one  of
the  great  tasks  of  our  time.
Africa's   Deeper   Troubles:  Since  last  November  the  military
have  taken  over  in  five  African  countries:   Congo  (Leo),  Da-
homey,  Central  African  Republic,   Upper  Volta  and  now  Ni-
geria.    The   latest   Foreign   Aid  report  just  sent  to  Congress
boasts  that  $29.4  million   in  military  aid   given   11   African
U.S. Army's Own Chemical War Manual Admits Gases  Now Used  in Vietnam Can Be  Lethal
The   l-'.S.  appears  to  have  embarked  on  a  new  phase  of
i'.as   warfare.    The   Wall   Street   Journal   (Jan.  5)   said   the
Joint   Chiefs  of   Staff   was  considering  a  proposal  to  supply
"more   effective"   Rases   to   field   commanders   in  Vietnam.
Within  several  weeks,  the  WSJ  predicted, the  plan  would be
forwarded   to   the   White   House   for   final   approval.     Two
gases  mentioned  for  possible  use  were  CNS  and  BZ.    CNS
causes  severe  nausea,  tearing,  colic,  and  diarrhea  that  can
last  for  weeks.    BZ causes  the  victim  to  lose  muscle  control
and  lapse  into disorientation, occasional  hallucinations,  fever
and   headaches  for  periods  up  to  10  days.     A  new  develop-
ment  appeared Jan.  14 wfien  UPI  (in  the  Wash.  Daily  News)
i-epurted  that  American  and  Australian  troops  ending their
sweep  through  the  Ho  Bo  woods  "seeded   tunnels  with  nau-
sea-producing  gas  crystals  that  will  not  dissipate  for  days."
Although  officially  classified "non-lethal",  neither  the  new
uasi's  nor  the  "riot  control  agents"  already  in  use  are  as
safe  as  the  Pentagon  would  have  us  believe.    According  to
the  Army's  own  "Military  Chemistry  and  Chemical  Manual",
even  the  "milder" gases  in  use  since April  are  lethal  at  high
density.    Their  median  lethal  dosages—enough  to  kill  50%
of   the   people   in   the   area   contaminated—range   from   11
grams   per  minute  per  meter   cubed   to  25.    While  only  a
tiny  fraction  of  this  renders  a  man  ineffective,  the  grenades
used  by  our  troops  carry  approximately  200  grams  of   gas
each  or  between  8  and  IS'/i   times  the  median  lethal   dose.
When  used  outdoors,  the  danger  from  these  gases  is  mini-
mized.    But,  in  Vietnam,  the  gases  are  used  most  often  in
caves  and  tunnels  where  terrain,  humidity, temperature  and
wind  conditions  make  it  practically impossible  to  predict  the
density  and  persistency  of  a  gas  on  a  given  spot.    "How  do
we  know  how  much  gas  is  necessary  to  get  a  man  out  of  a
cave?"  said   an  Army  information  officer.     "We  just   drop
it; whether or  not  he  wants  to  come  out  is  up  to  him."   But
what  if  the  man  in  the  cave  is  an  aged  peasant,  a  terrified
child  or  a  wounded soldier?—P.O.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/..F. Stone's  Weekly^  January  24,1966
... Why  The  Silence of  J. Edgar  Hoover  on  The  Murders of  Moore  and Dee?
nations  enable  them  "to  thwart  Soviet  and  Chinese   Commu-
nist  efforts  to gain  a dominating  influence"  in countries "whose
political  and  economic  vulnerability  make  them  tempting  tar-
gets  for  subversion  and  infiltration."     In  the  Central  African
Republic  and  Dahomey  the  coups  were  designed  to  break  rela-
tions with China;  one  suspects  the  CIA  may have  had  a  hand.
Behind  all  these  obscure  intrigues and  complex political-tribal
tangles  lies one  common  factor:  the  continued  impoverishment
of  Africa.    The  prices  of  almost  all  the  basic  materials it  sells
abroad   have  been   falling:   cocoa,  sugar,   bananas,   coffee  and
wood.    It  is on  such  products  that  Africa  depends  for  the  for-
eign  exchange  to  meet  it-,  rising  debts  and  aspirations.   These
are  troubles  military  dictatorship  will  not  cure.  .  .  .
POLLS:   A  Gallup  poll  we  saw  fully   reported   only  in  the
York,  Pa.,  Gazelle  &  Daily  (Jan.  IO)  showed   nearly  nine  of
every  ten  people  believe  the  greatest  event  this  year  would  be
an  end  of  the  Vietnamese  war  and  peace  in  the  world.  .  .  .
The  latest  Harris poll  (Congressional  Rctonl, Jan.  17, p.  291)
reassuringly  shows  7-to-l  opposition   to  the  Ku  Klux  Klan—
even  a  consensus  in  the  South  against   it-  -but  it  also  reveals
an  appalling  political  ignorance.    When  asked  which  two  or
three  words  best  describe  the  people  who  support   the  Klan,
the  fourth  most   frequent  answer  was  "Communists."      This
was  the  choice  of  29%   in  the  nation,  24%  in  the  South  and
43%  among  Negroes.    The  word,  apparently,   has  become  a
synonym  for  anything  bad. ...  A  poll  we  prefer   drew  com-
plaint  from  Roger  Blough  of  U.S.   Steel   in  the  current   Har-
vard  Business  Review.    He  writes  that  for  the  past  three  years
the  admissions  committee  of  Antioch   College  has  asked   en-
trance  candidates   whom   they  most  admired   in  this  country.
Not  a  single  one  was a  businessman  or  a  military  leader.  .  .  .
Requiestat  in  Monte:  We  are  less  reluctant  to  invest  in  the
better  grade  stocks  and  bonds  now  that  the  Wall  Street  Journal
discloses  (Jan.  12)  that  almost  all  of  our  top  5CO corporations
have  some  sort  of  underground  alternate  headquarters  for  use
in  the  event  of  thermonuclear  war.    The  bigger  the  company
the  deeper  the  hole.    Standard  Oil  (New   Jersey),  Manufac-
turers  Hanover  Trust   and   Shell   Oil   are  among   those   most
deeply  dug  in.    They  have  quarters  in  the  hollowed   out  core
Still  The  Unmentionables
Saigon,  Jan.  17—The  South  Vietnamese  government,
with  the  logistical   support  of  the  United  States,  has
undertaken  the  largest  propaganda  campaign  ever  at-
tempted  in  this  country.   For  the  offensive,  timed with
its    lunar   New   Year,   psychological   warfare    officials
have   concocted   popular  songs,   radio  appeals,    almost
two   dozen  leaflets,  and  an  astrological   calendar   pre-
pared  with  the  aid of  certified  Asian  astrologers.  .  .  .
[But]   Not  one  of   the  slips   of   paper   that   are   being
dropped  over  South  Vietnam  every  day  mentions  land
reform  or  political  and  religious  liberty  or  freedom   of
speech   or   free   enterprise.     By   Thursday   more   than
110  million  pieces  will  have  been  dropped.
—K.  W. Appel, Jr. in New  York  Times, Jan.  18.
of  Iron  Ml.  near  Hudson,  N.Y.,   "protected  from  blast,  heat
and   radiation  by  countless  tons  of   rock,  soil  and   iron  ore."
New   York   City,   115  miles  south,   could   be  incinerated  but
Iron  Mt.  would  escape  unscathed.    Only  a  near  direct  hit  by
a  multi-megaton  weapon  could  smash this  privileged sanctuary.
There,  when  "a  28-ton  steel  door  in  the  mountainside   swings
open"  the  visitor  "wanders  through  offices,   kitchens,  dormi-
tories."     Here  the  selected   few,  like  the  animals  on  Noah's
Ark,  would   ride   out   the   storm.     Among   Jersey    Standard's
"chosen  people"  (as  the  Wall   Street  Journal  reverently   calls
them)  are  the  president,  the  chairman anJ  the  entire  board  of
directors  for  whom   double-bedrooms   with  semi-private   baths
are  assigned.     Enough   clerks   and   secretaries  to   serve   them
would   live   in   dormitories   the   construction   crew   cynically
termed   "the   slave  quarters."    The  living  rooms  are  brightly
colored  and  hung  with vivid  prints; there  is even  a music  room
for   piped-in   concerts.     We   found  ourselves  wishing  we  be-
lieved  in  immortality.   We  could  almost   look   forward  to  a
Third   World   War,   knowing  we  could   amuse   ourselves  by
looking  down  on  the  Jersey  Standard  board  of  directors meet-
ing  in  cozy  imperturbability under  Iron  Mt.  after   the  rest  of
us  had   been  pulverized,  cannily  debating  whether  to   declare
an   extra   dividend,  just   to   improve   the   tone   of   the   stock
market.
Why  the  Saigon  Regime   Has  l(fo  Interest  in  Anything  But  An  Expanded  War
"Disappointment   [in   the  State   of   the   Union   Message]
also  was  voiced  by  a  few  politically  conscious   Vietnamese
that  the  President  did  not  make  an  explicit  endorsement  of
revolutionary   social   change   as   an  alternative  to  commu-
nism. ...  It  was  felt  this   would  have  strengthened  the
hand  of  Ambassador  Lodge  who, since  his  return in August,
has  been  urging  sweeping  land  reforms  and  a  more equita-
ble  social  structure.   The  Viet  Cong  recruits from  the  south
are  almost  entirely   from   the  politically  and  economically
disinherited  class   of   land  tenants.
"Lodge  has  repeatedly  stressed  that  political  remedies  in-
volved  in  'true  revolution'  are  basic  preconditions  to  win-
ning  the  war.    Yet  both  Lodge  and  his  top  political  aide,
retired  Maj. Gen.  Edward  Lansdale  are  known  to  have  be-
come  increasingly  discouraged.  .  .  .  They  have  encountered
formidable  opposition  from   the   land-owning   urban  middle
class.  .  .  .  This  helps  explain official  Vietnamese response  to
the  President's  speech  and  his  peace  offensive  and provides
the   key   to   the   South  Vietnam   government's   position  on
negotiations.    This   position,  voiced  yesterday  by   Foreign
Minister  Tran  Van  Do,  is   that   the   war  is   principally   of
aggression  by  North Vietnam and can  be  won  on  the battle-
field, but  is  basically  not  negotiable."
—Washington Star  special  from  Saigon, Jan.  14.
"Many  top  Vietnamese  favor  carrying  the  ground war  to
North  Vietnam  and even  on  to  China.  This  same  Vietnamese
power  group does  not  share  the  U.S.  belief  that  victory  can
be  found  in  South  Vietnam alone,  since  it  requires  the  kind
of  sweeping social  revolution  they  have  no  interest  in  pur-
suing.  .  .  . The ruling,  largely middle-class power  group  .  .  .
has   no  intention  of   giving   up  its   favored  economic  and
political   position.     Instead   it   seeks   victory   almost  solely
through  military  action  in  an  expanded  war."
—Washington  Star  special  from   Saii/on,  Jan.  15.   These
two  unusual  unsigned  dispatches  reflect   the  views  of   Lodi/e
and  Liinndalc.   The  Saiyon  government  is  based  on  absentee
landlords  and  urban  business  men  profiting   from  the  ivar  in-
flation.    Neither   have   an   interest   in   tin   social    reforms
Lodge   and  Lansdale   believe  could  provide   the  basis  for   a
non-Communist   pro-American  regime.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  24, 1966
Time  for  A  Civilian  Government  and  Free  Opinion  in  South  Vietnam
(Continued  from   Page One)
to  be  the  ideological  purists of  the  Communist  world.    But  in
the  last   French   election   Radio  Peking  supported   the  "bour-
geois"  de  Gaulle   against   the  candidate  of   the   French   Left.
That   is  what  a  friendly   French   policy  did   to  Maoist   ortho-
doxy.    If  Washington  would  replace  the  face  of  hostility  with
the  face  of  friendship,  and  ignore   initial  rebuffs,   it  too  might
get  surprising  results.
Using  The  Lull  to  Land  More  Troops
On  this  craggy  course  to  the  reestablishment  of   confidence,
every  reappearance  of  the  tricky will  be  a  setback.  An  example
was  the  landing  of  7,000  new  troops  in  the  lull  before   the
New  Year  truce,  and  the  headlines  announcing  that  we  would
have  340,000  in  South  Vietnam  by  next  June,  The   President's
State  of  the  Union  Message  offered  to  limit  or  reduce  the  scale
of   fighting   if   the  other  side   reciprocated.     For   some  weeks
our  own  intelligence  has  reported  no  contacts  with North  Viet-
namese  troops.    This  may  be  a  signal  that  the  other  side  has
begun   to  de-escalate.     It  ill  accords   with  this  to  land   more
troops   and   allow   unofficial   sources   to   blast   the   news   of   a
buildup  from  190,000  to  340,000  in  the  next  six  months.  In
addition,  while  our  military   leak  suspicion  to  the   press  that
the  other  side  may  use  the  New   Year  truce  to  build  up   //.r
troops,  we  take advantage  of  the  quiet  pre-truce hours  to  land
7,000  more  of  our  own.    Past  experience  has  shown  how vul-
nerable  newly  landed  troops  otherwise  arc  to  guerrilla attack.
There  is  a  second  front  on  which  any  real  peace   offensive
must  proceed,  and  this  is the  question  of  a civilian  government
in  Saigon.     A  puppet   military  dictatorship  is  a  positive hin-
drance  on  the  road  to  peace.    The  growing  credibility of  the
peace  offensive  is  already  shaking  the  Kv  regime.    This  play-
hoy  admirer  of   Hitler  is  in  danger  of   being  overthrown  by
hard-line    (. icncrals.     In  so  unstable  a  situation  it   is  not   easy
to  lx;gin  peace  talks  and  continue  military  effort   at  the  same
time?    The   one  important  bit  of   news  *  at  the   tumultuous
Manhattan  Centre  meeting  in  New  York  City  last  Sunday  for
"  Aside  from  the  excerpts  from  their  prepared  statements
we  published in  last  week's  issue.  In  addition A.  J.  Muste  an-
nounced  plans  for  a  Yankee  Stadium  peace  rally  in  March.
Brass  Hat  in   Full   Dress   Blinders
"In  the   most   extended  such   discussion   of   Vietnam
prospects  by  a  top  military  commander, General Greene
[Marine  Corps  commandant]  spoke  with  confidence  of
improving   conditions,    not   only   militarily   but   in   the
rapidly  growing  rehabilitation.  .  .  .  'They  [the people]
know  we  are  there  to  help  them.'"
—Baltimore Sun,  from  the Pentagon, Jan.  18.
"Expanding  terrorism,  insecurity,  a  violent  inflation,
profiteering,  food  shortages.  .  .  . The situation in  South
Vietnam  is  found  to  be  worse  now  than  before  the U.S.
started  moving  in  large  numbers of  troops  last  spring.
...  In  the  Saigon  area,  the  cost  of  rice  has  doubled in
six  months.  .  .  .  Black  marketing  is  bad. ...  In big
cities,  the  atmosphere   seems  infected  by  honky-tonks.
.  .  .  U.S. and  South   Vietnamese  forces   actually  hold
less   territory   than   they   did  a   year  ago.   So-called
pacified  areas  are  not  safe,  and  the  highly touted coun-
ter  insurgency   has  not  gotten  off  the  ground.  .  . .'.'
—U.S.  News  &  World  Report:  The   Untold  Story  of
The  War, an  eye-opener   in  a  pro-war  paper,  Jan.  24.
the  three  back  from  Hanoi  .came  in  the  last, few  minutes when
Prof.  Staughton  Lynd  was  asked  why  the  National  Liberation
Front  had  not  established  a  provisional  government.    He  re-
plied  that  it  had  not  done  so  because  it  was  leaving  the  way
open  fur  a  coalition.^    The   longer  we  prevent  normal.political
life   from   resuming  in  South  .Vietnam,  the  weaker  our   own
political  position  will  be  in  any  such  coalition.    Now   is  the
time  to  prove,  for  once,  that  we  are  not  entirely  insincere  in
talking  of   free  choice   in  South  Vietnam.    A  majority   of   its
people  are  in  the  urban  enclaves  we  control.    If  we  were  now
to  allow  free  press  and   free  political  party  activity,  we  would
give  non-Communist  democratic elements  a  chance  to  live  and
breathe  again.    If   Bao  Dai  could   allow  neutralist  parties  to
campaign   in  a  fairly  free  election  (see Bernard  B.  Fall's  ac-
count  in  The  Nation  last  April  5)  while  the  war  against  the
Viet  Minh  was  going  on,  we  can  do  so  today  if  we  want  to.
A  demonstration  that  the  U.S.  was  at  last  prepared  to  let  South
Vietnam's  people  determine  their  own  destiny  would  be  the
greatest   surprise  of   all.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)
Street   ..................................
City   ......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5  send
(To)    Name   ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,
Washington,  D.  C.
N.  W.
20015
a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
....Zone............State.....
a  gift  sub  to:
1/24/66
City   .......... ................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftiei
Indicate   if  announcement  wished   D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  200IS
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   r.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  WashinRton,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,   the  last   week   in   December  and   Iht
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Wcekly  during  July   at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by   I.   F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager.   Eslher   M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the  U.S.:  $6   in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
Sir,  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED