I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966may16.pdf

============================================================

IPS  — 2nd  Report from  Vietnam
Remark  on  A  Hotel  Veranda
"At  first  you  think  you  know  but  after  two  months,  you're  no  longer  sure  what  you're  fighting  for."
—Young  soldier from  Takoma,  just  out  of  the  jungle, in  Saigon  for  "R  and  R"  (rest  and  recreation)  April, 1966.
I. K Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  17
MAY   16,  1966
'<><       WASHINGTON,   D.    C.15  CENTS
What  Vietnamese  Say  Privately  in  Saigon
The   strategy  of  U.S.  press  relations  in  South  Vietnam  is
that  of  the  Warm  Embrace.    It  is  easier  to  get  away  from  a
bar  girl  on  Nguyen  Hue  Street  than  from  the  loving  arms of
Press  Chief  Barry  Zorthian's  bureaucratic octupus  for  tender-
izing   (and  ultimately  digesting)   the  visiting  correspondent.
VIPs  like  Joseph  Alsop  get  a  broad  view  of  the  war   from
Gen.   Westmoreland's   own   plane,   or   a   specially  prepared
memorandum  like  that  given  Cyrus  Sulzberger  to  confirm  his
worst  suspicions  of  the  recent  protest  movement  in  Hue  and
Danang.    Everything  is  done  to  make  it  comfortable and  easy
to  cover the  war  through  official  channels,  and  the  most  enter-
prising  visitor  soon  turns  from  the  exhausting  task  of  pene-
trating  the  strange  world  and  the  strange  tongues  outside  to
the  warm  womb  of  the  JUSPAO   (Joint  U.S.  Public   Affairs
Organization)  HQ.
The  visitor  can  easily  find  most  of  his  limited  time  con-
sumed  by  official  briefings  and  visits  to  show-pieces and  battle
scenes.    Every  effort  is  made  to  enlist  the  visitor emotionally
in  the  war.    I  decided  to  keep  away  from  the  offer   of  field
trips.    I  had  no  desire  to  compete  with  Hanson  Baldwin.    I
wanted  to  get  some  idea  of  civilian  politics  and  for  this  I
wanted  to  talk  with  Vietnamese.    I  decided  to  stay  in  Saigon
and  try  my  luck  on  my  own.     In  this  installment  I  want  to
let   a   few   of   the   Vietnamese   speak   for   themselves.
A  Catholic  from  The  North
My most  surprising encounter  came  early one morning while
waiting  for  an  appointment  at  a  U.S.  Aid  Mission  compound.
An  elderly Vietnamese  to  whom  I  smiled  asked  me  in  French
if  I  knew  any  German.   I  said  I  knew  a  little.    He  brought
out  a  grimy  German  primer  in  French  and  asked  how  I  pro-
nounced  a  certain  word.    I  have  forgotten   the  word  but  I
cannot  forget  the  conversation.    It  was  so  different  from  the
American  stereotype  of  what  it  should  have  been.    Our  con-
versation  turned  to politics.   When  I  asked  him  to what  party
he  belonged,  he  pulled  a  cross  from  under  his  shirt.    He  was
a  refugee  from  North  Vietnam,  a  former  landowner,  who had
lost  one  of  his  children,  a  two  month  old  infant  on  the  trek
south  in  1956  through  jungle and  over  mountains.   I  expected
him  to  be  a  bitter-ender.    Instead,  though   employed  by  the
U.S.,  and  speaking  in  a  U.S.  mission,  he  was  for   peace.
He   raised   his   hand,   with   the   five   fingers   outstretched.
"This,"  he  said  in  French,  "is  a  war  of  depopulation.     Soon
only  one  Vietnamese  in  five  will  be  left.    This  is  a  war  sans
issue—with  no  way  out.    It  would  take  two  million  soldiers
for   victory,  and  that  is  impossible."    He  ran  his  hand  ex-
Can't  Fool An  Old Sea  Dog Dept.
"I  was   impressed  with   Ky   when  he   came  here  to
meet  the  President.   He  is  a  smart  little  fellow.    You
cannot  have  wrong  motives  and  be  as  patriotic  as  he
is.    He  seems  to  have  no  desire  to  be  a  politician."
—Admiral   Ulysses   S.  Grant  Sharp,   commander-in-
chief    Pacific,   in   an  interview   at  Honolulu  with  Bob
Considine,  Baltimore  News  American,  May  8.
pressively  down  in  front  of  his  face.    "It's  all  a  question  of
face,"   he  said.    Then,  in  vivid   pantomime,  rolling  up  his
pants  leg  and  rubbing  an  aching  stomach,  he  imitated   the
ragged   and  hungry  guerrillas  the  U.S.  was  up  against,  but
couldn't  wipe  out.    "It's  all  a  question  of  face,"  he  repeated.
"We   must   return   to  Geneva,"  he  said.    He  was  for  a
cease-fire,  for  elections  to  be  supervised  by  a  UN  force   (he
dismissed  the  currently scheduled  elections  cynically),  and  for
a   negotiated   peace,   to  be   followed  by  an   American  with-
drawal.    "In  the  cities,"  he  said,  "people  don't  like  the Com-
munists  but  don't  want  to  be  soldiers.    In   the  countryside
everywhere people  are  sad  and  unhappy.   But  here  in  Saigon"
—and  he  grimaced—"many  people  are  making  money  on  the
war.     They  are  building  apartment  houses  for  the Americans.
They'd  like  the  Americans to  stay  for  a  hundred  years."    He
shrugged  his  shoulders  in  a  gesture  of  despair.
"You    Must  Talk  to  The  NLF"
Another   surprise   was   an   interview   with   a   Vietnamese
lawyer,  a  high  official  of  the  country's  permanent  civil  service.
I  cannot  identify  him  more  closely.   Like my  Catholic  friend,
he was in  despair over  what  the  war was doing  to  his  country.
"There  is  no  way  out,"   he  said,  "except  to   recognize  and
negotiate   with   the  National   Liberation   Front.     It   controls
two-thirds  of  the  territory  and  almost  half  of  the  people.    In
legal  terms,  this  is  physical  sovereignty.     It's   a  reality  and
peace  can  only  be  made  by  dealing  with  realities.   Everyone
wants  peace  but  peace  cannot  be  made  in  Peking  or  Hanoi.
It  must  be  made  here.     We   must   invite  the  NLF   to   the
negotiating  table."
We  spoke  together  in  one  of  those  comfortably  cool  upper
middle  class  villas  with  walled  gardens  where  life  goes  on  in
Saigon  much  as  it  has  for  a  generation  despite  the  continued
warfare.    The  lawyer was  French  educated,  of  wealthy family,
a  cultivated  and  witty  man,  unable  to  speak  publicly—death
or  deportation  is  the  penalty  for  peace  talk.    "It  is  obvious,"
(Continued  on  Page  Two)
6   j
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 16,1966
(Continued  from  Page  One)
he  said, "that  the  Front  has  grown  stronger  not  weaker with
U.S.   intervention.    According  to   your   McNamara's   own
figures  only  50,000  of  the  Front's  270,000  men  are  from   the
North.   The  forces  against  them  outnumber them  more  than
three-to-one  yet  the  Front  can  withstand  them.    This  is  a
reality  which  cannot be  ignored."
He  was  against  reunification.    "The  North  is  Communist.
Our  life  requires   a  republican  and  liberal  government,"  he
continued.   "If  the  U.S.  recognizes the  Front,  invites  it  to  a
conference,  and  proposes  a  republican  government,  I  believe
the   Front   will   accept  this  so  long  as  the   regime  is  non-
aligned,  and  represents  all  political  tendencies  including  the
Communists.   It  would  take  20 years  to  rebuild  the  South  to
the  point  where  it  was  strong  enough  to  confront  the  North
in  reunification.    I  would  normalize trade  and  exchanges  of
all  kinds.    I  would  sell  them  rice  and  buy  their  cement  and
coal.    But  I  would  oppose  even  confederation  at  this  time.
If  it  can't  be  accomplished in  Germany, how can it  be accom-
plished  here?    The  two  systems  are  too  different."
When  I  brought  up  the  question  of  elections,  I  found  my
new  friend  skeptical.    "Where  would they  be held?" he  asked.
"Only  in  the   cities,  and  even  in  the  cities  of  Saigon,   Hue
and  Danang,  the  Viet  Cong  is  strong.    How  can  you  have
elections  when three-fourths  of the  territory  is not included ? "
Then  he  brought  up  another  fundamental  obstacle.    "Com-
munist  and  neutralist  candidates  are  to  be barred," he  noted.
"But  who  is  to  decide who  is  a  Communist or  a   neutralist?
This   means   that   pro-war   and   anti-Communist   candidates
will  be  the  only  ones  allowed  to   run."
"We  Understand Each Other"
This  civil  servant  relies  on  two  factors  to  make  a  success-
ful   negotiation  possible.    "One,"  he  said,  "is  that  the  war  is
impoverishing  all  of  us,  north  and  south.    The  other  is  that
Ho  and  most  of  the  Northern  leaders  like  those  of  the  Na-
tional  Liberation  Front  are  Western   educated   and  closer  to
us  in  outlook  than  they  are  to  China.   The  Front  is  not  en-
tirely  Communist  but  a  national  front,  with  many   genuine
nationalists  in  it.    I  knew Nguyen Huu  Tho,  president  of  the
NLF,  when  we  were  in  the  university together.    I  remember
when  he  began  an  anti-French  movement  in   1950.    He  was
a  real  nationalist, not  a  Viet Minh.   The  leaders  of  the  Front
come  out  of  the  same  milieu  as  ourselves.    We   understand
each  other.    They  want  a  democratic  regime,  neither  Com-
munist  nor  anti-Communist.   We  need  a  legal   and  civilian
U.S.-backed  regime  here which can  negotiate  with  the   NLF."
He  envisaged  withdrawal  of  U.S.  troops  only  after   negotia-
tions,  and  he  was  against  retention  by  the  U.S.  of  its   bases
in   South  Vietnam.   "You  don't  need  them,"  he  said.    "The
7th  fleet  gives  you  a  powerful   offshore  base."
Off  the  main  streets  in  Saigon  are  smaller  unpaved  alleys
lined   by   miniature  houses   for   this   miniature   people.    On
one  of  them  is  a  three  story  structure,  again  small  by  our
standards,  which  houses   Van  Hanh  University,  a   Buddhist
school  of  higher learning.    One  of  the  heroes  of  its  students
and, of  the  peace  movement  is  a  Buddhist  Bonze who  is  also
a   poet,  the   Venerable  Nhat  Hanh.    Some  of  his   anti-war
poems  have  been  set  to  music  and  his  latest  volume  of  verses
sold  4000  copies, enough  to  call  it  sharply  to  the  attention  of
the  police.   They  were  given  orders  to  pick  up  all  the  copies
they  could find in  the  bookstores.   I  had  the  pleasure  of  talk-
ing  with  him  in  his  tiny  apartment  near  the  University.   He
represents  not  only  a  neutralist  point  of  view—though  this
attitude  seems pale and  colorless beside his  hatred  of war  and
injustice—but   of  secularism  in  politics.    "I'd   rather   speak
as  a  Vietnamese than  as  a  Buddhist,"  he  told  me.   "I  have
many  Catholic  friends  and  we  share  a  distrust  of  our  own
religious   leaders."    The  group  of  intellectuals   who  gather
about  Nhat  Hanh  distrust  the  militant  Buddhist leader  Thich
Tri  Quang,  for  example.   While  U.S.  sources—always  prone
to  see  Red  in  any  opposition—regard  Tri  Quang  as  a  Com-
munist,  these  students  think  him  more  wrapped  up  in  a  con-
Add  Subversives at  Work
"Anti-government   leaflets   were   picked   [sic]    by   a
police  patrol  along  Tran  Quang  Khai  street,  Tan-Dinh,
Sunday  at  about  4 a.m.   They were  described as strong-
ly   hostile   to   the    government   and   demanded   'food,
clothes  and  democracy'  for  the   masses."
—Saigon  Post,  April  18.
fessional   conflict   with   the   Catholics  than   concerned  with
peace  and  national  objectives.
Thich  Nhat  Hanh's  personal  creed  seems to  be compounded
of   Buddhism   and   existentialism.     His   group   published   a
little  book  last  year  called  Dialogue.   In  it,  in  an  open  letter
to  the  Rev. Martin  Luther  King,  Nhat  Hanh  defended  those
bonzes  who  had  burned  themselves  to  death  in  the  demon-
strations   which  led  to   the   fall   of  Diem.    He  wrote  that
Buddha  in  one of  his  former  lives  "gave  himself  to  a  hungry
lion  which  was  about  to  devour her  own  cubs."    He  said  the
self-burnings  were  not  suicide  but  an  act  "of  highest  com-
passion"  in  order  to  call  the  attention   of  the  world  to  the
sufferings   of  the   Vietnamese  people.    In  his  letter  to   Dr.
King,  Nhat  Hanh  wrote  "Nobody  here  wants  the  war,"  and
ended  with  a  prayer  which  gives  the  flavor  of  his   religious
and  philosophical outlook, "Lord  Buddha,  help  us  to  be  alert
to  realize  that  we  are  not  victims  of  each  other.    We  are
victims  of  our  own  ignorance  and  the  ignorance  of  others."
He  is  a  slightly  built  man  of  40,  who  moves  in  an  aura  of
modesty  and  serenity.    He  speaks  English,  for   he  studied
the  philosophy  of  religion  at  Princeton   in   1961   and  was  a
lecturer  on  Buddhism  at  Columbia in  1962-63.   The  students
and  younger  faculty  people  who  crowd  his  apartment  look
on  him  with   reverence.
"Nobody  can  win  this  war,"   he  told  me.    "Vietnam  can
only   lose.     The   South   Vietnamese   and   U.S.    government
speak  of  a  social  revolution  but  nothing  can  be  done  while
the  war  is  going  on.   The war  undermines everything.    It  is
too late  for  the  Americans  to  realize  a  social  revolution  any-
way.    After  seven  years  of  American  intervention,  the  Viet
Cong  are  stronger  than  ever,  and  200,000  American  troops
mean  200,000   'betises'   [blunders,  stupidities]  a  day,  antag-
onizing  people  further.
"You  cannot  distinguish  the  VC from  the  peasants.   Every
day  the  number  of  peasants  killed  is  far  greater  than  the
number  of  VC.    Every   day   of  war   makes  more  VC.    The
first  essential  is  a  cease  fire,  then  all  else  will  follow.    The
VC  prefer  political  to  military  means.    I  believe  they  would
accept  a  cease-fire.    They  feel  that  the  current  peace  moves
are  not  genuine.    The  thing  to  do  is  to  stop  the  bombings
North  and  South,  stop  all  offensive  military   action,  and  do
it  sincerely  and  the  other   side  will   reciprocate.
For  U.S.  Friendship and  Aid
"Our   real  aspiration  is  to  make  Americans  our   friends
not  in  war  but  in  reconstruction,  otherwise   it  will  be  very
slow.    The  French  built   schools   as   a   friendly   memorial.
You  too  must  leave  a  good  sentiment  in  Asian  hearts."
The  monk  deplored   a  moral  degeneration   on  both   sides.
"It  is  a  shame  for  us  and for  all  humanity,"  Nhat  Hanh  said,
"that  while  war  devastates  the  villages,  here  in  Saigon  peo-
ple  make  money  from  the  war.    A  new  class  of  Vietnamese
has  been  created  who  serve  the  Americans  and  profit  from
the  devastation  of  their  own country.   They  are  men  without
culture  or  feeling.    On the  other  hand  most  of  the  American
soldiers  here  are  not  well  educated,  do  not  understand   the
Vietnamese  and  constantly  offend.    They  sell  watches  to  get
girls.    The  people  feel  their   country  is  being  flooded  with
these  foreign  troops  and  controlled  by  them.    This   makes
a  very  bad  impression  and  gives  VC propaganda  its  chance.
This  is  why  we  are  losing  the  war.
"In  1954 when  Diem  first  came  in,  we had  a  chance  to  .win.
But  the   Diem  government  made  too  many  mistakes.    The
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

;. F. Stone's Weekly,  May 16,  1966
Americans   did  not   realize   the   psychological  struggle  and
stressed  mostly  the  military.   The  VC are  very  clever.   They
come  to   the  villages   in  simple  dress.    They  take  care  of
babies,  clean  the  houses  and  practice  austerity.    The  govern-
ment  agents  arrive  beautifully  dressed.    They  draw  big   sal-
aries.   They  give  orders  and they withdraw after  a few  hours.
"The  Americans,"  Nhat  Hanh  continued,"  instead  of  help-
ing  us  to  stand  on  our  own  feet,    have  made  us  more  de-
pendent,  so  that  now  we  even  have  to  import  rice.    On  top
of  that,  the  intensification of  the  war  and  the  bombing  have
made   almost   a   million   people   homeless.    In   the   refugee
camps  conditions are  beyond  belief.   The  refugees  are   sup-
posed  to  get  7 piastres  a  day.    A  young man  needs  a  kilo of
rice  a   day.    This   costs   15  piastres  in  Saigon,   but   in   the
refugee   camps  because  of   the   cost   of   transportation   the
cost  of  rice  may  go  as  high  as  40 to  60 piastres  a  kilo.   For
7  piastres  all  one  can  buy  is  a  thin  soup."
"It  is  hard  to  live  with  the  Communists,"  the  monk  said.
"They  will  not   allow  freedom   of  thought  where  they  take
over.    But  we  must  not  despair,  nor  be  too  afraid  of  them.
We  have  to  face  up  to  them  and  forge  our  own  links  with
the  people."
A  Peace  Corps  of  Their  Own
Nhat  Hanh  and  his  group  have  organized   a  little  Peace
Corps  of  their  own  to  work  in  the  villages.    It  has  estab-
lished  three  camps  where  students  work  and  live  among  the
peasants.    "The   urban   intelligensia,"  he  said,  "must  earn
the  trust  of  the  peasants."   He  himself  was  at  one  of  these
camps  in  a  nearby  area  when  the  recent   mortar  attack  on
the   airport  took   place.    "We  were  not   afraid   of  the  VC
mortars,"  he  recounted,   "but   we  were  terrified  by  the   U.S.
plane  raids  which  followed.    The  villages   nearby   suffered
greatly."
He  thought  the  Buddhists  deficient  when  it  came  to  social
issues.    "We  consider  ours   a  school  for   training   youth  in
social  service," he  explained.   "We  follow  the  ideas  of Gandhi
and  of  Vinobha  Bhave,"  the  Indian  who  led  a  voluntary  land
redistribution  campaign.    Nhat  Hanh  feels  that  only  by  such
grass  roots  work  can  his  group  hope  to  compete  in   peace
with  the  Communists.   "Remember,"  he  said  as  our   conver-
sation   ended,  "nobody  can  win  the  war.    It  can  have  only
one  end—to destroy  all  Vietnam."    In  one of his  most  famous
poems  he  wrote,  "If  we kill  man,  with  whom  shall  we live?"
Beyond  politics  and  ideology,  this  is  the  simpler  existentialist
vision  that   moves  Nhat  Hanh  and  the  young   intellectuals
gathered   around  him.
Every  visitor  tends  to  seek  out  the  like-minded  and  there-
fore  to  discover  what  he  hoped  to   find.   The  views  brought
back  by  pro-peace  people  like  myself  are  therefore  as  apt  to
be  skewed  as  those  with  which  the   U.S.  bureaucracy   com-
forts  itself.    I  want  now  to  report  a  quite  different  inter-
view  with   an  outstanding  political   figure,   the  famous   Dr.
Phan  Quang  Dan,  who may  yet  play  a  leading,  and  perhaps
unexpected,  role  in  South  Vietnam.
Dr.  Dan  became  famous  in  1959  when  he  was  the  one  op-
Testimonial
"The  VC  can  infiltrate  and  launch  surprise   attacks
anywhere,  even  in  the  most  strongly  defended  areas."
—Prime   Minister   Ky   in   Saigon   Daily  News  April
lit  after   VC  shelled  Tan  Son  Nhut   airport.
positionist   elected   to  the   National  Assembly  in  Saigon  in
spite  of  an  electoral  law  designed  to  return  a  rubber   stamp
legislature.    He was  barred  from  taking  his  seat  on  trumped
up  charges  of  violating  the   electoral   laws.    His   life   may
serve  to  illuminate  the  complexities  of  Vietnamese  politics,
and  some  of  the  surprises  which  may  lie  ahead.    Dr.  Dan  is
a   Northerner,    born   in   Vinh   in   1918,   educated   in   Hanoi.
While  still  studying  medicine  he  began  to  work  in  the  anti-
French   underground.    He  founded   an  anti-Communist  and
anti-colonialist   paper   in  Hanoi  after   the  war   and   refused
offers   of  posts  in  two  coalition  governments  set  up  by  Ho
Chi  Minh  in  1946.    Instead  after  the  agreement  between  Ho
and  the  French  he  went  into  exile  in  China.   He  established
friendly  relations  with  the  Kuomintang  and  became  a  politi-
cal  adviser   to  the  exiled  Emperor  Bao  Dai  but  broke  with
him  in  1949 because  Dr.  Dan felt  the  independence the  French
offered   was  phony.    He  continued  his  political  and  medical
career  in  exile,  obtained  a  medical  degree  at  the   Sorbonne
in  1949,  and  a  master's  in  public health  at  Harvard  in   1953.
When  Diem  set  up  his  first  government  in  1954  he   offered
Dr.  Dan  the  Secretaryship  of  Social  Welfare  but   Dr.  Dan
refused  it.    He  came  home  next  year,  however,  to   organize
work  in  preventive   medicine,  to  set  up  a  clinic  for  the  poor
which  he  still  operates,  and  to  organize  a  legal  opposition.
Dr.  Dan  was  arrested  in  1956  for  criticizing  the  rigged  elec-
tions  for  that  year's  Assembly.    His  opposition  paper  was
blown  up  by  Diem's  secret  police  and  finally  suppressed   in
1958.    He  was  arrested  again   after  the  unsuccessful  para-
troop  revolt   of  1960.    His  luster  was  somewhat  dimmed,  I
was  told,  when  in  his  1963  trial  he  recanted  and  praised   the
strategic  hamlet  program.   But  if  this  is  true  it  came  after
three  terrible  years  of  imprisonment  while  awaiting  trial,
two  of  them  in  solitary   confinement   in  a  secret   cell  under
the Saigon  Botanical  Gardens where he was savagely  tortured.
A  Hero of  The  Resistance
Dr.  Dan  is  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  democratic  resistance.
But  Dr.  Dan,  as  it  turned  out  in  my  interview,  is  also  an  ad-
vocate  of  continuing  the  war  to  victory,  and  of  sharply  re-
stricting  democratic  rights  in  the  process.    I  interviewed him
in   the   rather   poverty-stricken    clinic   he   operates   off   the
crowded  market  place  in  suburban  Gia  Dinh.    He  is  small,
dynamic,  intelligent,  dark-eyed  and   fast-talking.
"I   was  quite   surprised,"  Dr.  Dan  said,  "to   read   in   the
papers  that  the  Americans  are  worried  lest  the  coming  Con-
stituent  Assembly  be  dominated  by  Buddhists  or  neutralists.
I  think  such  an  outcome  impossible.   I  believe  the  elections
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
"An  American  Friend"  Advises  War-Weary  Vietnamese  to  Postpone  Democracy
"I  have  tried  to  be  objective  and  sympathetic  over   the
recent  increase  in  demonstrations,   which  purport  to  express
concern  for  democratic   government.    In  my  view,  the  Ky
government  is  doing  a  superb  job  of  handling  one  of   the
most   difficult   assignments  in  the  world.    During  the   con-
tinuing  crisis  he  deserves  the  maximum  support.    The  peo-
ple  of  Vietnam  have  been   fighting  some  type  of  war   for
the  last  25  years.    They  are  weary  of  war,  distrustful  of
each  other,  and  the  very  foundations  of  society   have  been
shaken.
"But  this  is  the  very   time  to  rally  for  national  unity.
Patience!  'Better  life  is  the  most  effective  way  to  fight  off
Communism.'    That   is  certainly  true  at  certain  stages  of
the  struggle.    But  if  it  comes  to  bricks  for  the  schools  or
arms  for  your  defenders,  the  immediate  choice—to  live—is
clear.   Further,  Democracy  is  in  my  view,  another  objective
that   is  neither  attainable   immediately   or   even   desirable
(immediately).     Democracy  is  predicated   on  an  educated
electorate  and  a  broad  middle class,  and  a  consensus,  if  you
will, of  a  basic  mutual  trust  among the  majority  of  citizens.
I  see  none  of  these  things  in  Vietnam.
"It  appears  the  main  thing  the  Vietnamese  people  agree
they  want  is  an  end to  the  war.   Am  I  now to  suppose  they
hold  the  Americans  responsible  for  the  war?"
—Letter  to  the  Editor  by  "An  American  Friend,"   Saigon  Daily  News,  April  23,  abridged.
7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 16,1966
Will  the  U.S.  Back  Dr.  Dan  Next  to  Keep  the  War   Going?
(Continued  from   Page  Three)
will  return  a rightist  majority and that  the  Left  will  be  weak,
as  is  natural  in  time  of  war  against  Communism.    The  pic-
ture  has  been  distorted  by  the  agitation  of  a  few  hundred
teen  agers  in  Saigon.
"The  difficult  problem  will  be  the  setting  up  of  valid politi-
cal  organizations  which  can  form  a  stable  and  workable  ma-
jority  government.   If  the  Assembly is  splintered,  if  no  ma-
jority   is  possible,  the   elections  will   turn   out   to   do  more
harm  than  good.    At  present,  because  of  the  long  years  of
political  repression,  beginning with  French  rule,  we  have  no
real   political  parties.    Religious  groupings   were  tolerated
because  religion  was  thought  not  to  be  dangerous.    So  we
have  religious rather than  political  parties—Buddhists,  Catho-
lics,  Cao  Dai  and  Hoa  Hao.
An  Anti-Communist  Coalition
"The   Catholics  are  a  well  organized  political  minority  in
which  the  priests  serve   as  cadres.    The  Buddhists,  though
a  majority—I  am  myself  a  Buddhist by tradition—are divided
into  too many  factions.   The  Buddhist  Institute,  so prominent
in  the  recent  demonstrations,  is  strong   in  Central  Vietnam
but  not  here.    Not  a  single  southern  province  joined  their
movement.    The  Southern   Buddhists  are   not   active   politi-
cally.    I  believe  the   vote  will  be  fragmented   among  these
diverse  religious  groups  and  that  if  the  Catholics,  the  Cao
Dai,  the  Hoa  Hao  and  the  Southern  Buddhists  can  get  to-
gether  they  can  form   a  strong  anti-Communist  regime.
"The  elections  will  provide  a  legal  basis  for  the  South  Viet-
namese  government.    Now  everyone  says  there  is  no  legal
administration,  only  a  self-appointed junta.    After  the  elec-
tions  it  will  be  clear  that  the  National  Liberation  Front  rep-
resents  very  little  and  exercises  control  only  by  terrorism.
There  is  nothing  to  worry  about,"  he  said,  addressing  me  as
if  I were Ambassador Lodge, "The  elections  will  make it  much
easier  for  the  Americans.   People  will  no  longer  be  able  to
say  this  is  a  government  of  warlords."
I  asked   Dr.  Dan  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  have   a
free  election  without  a  free  press.    He  thought  there  ought
to  be  freedom  of  the  press  but  with  limitations.   He  thought
the   U.S.  press  printed  too  much  military  news.    He  would
restrict  this  to   official   Ministry  of  War   communiques.    He
also  thought  all  pro-Communist propaganda  should be  barred.
"How  to  determine what  is  pro-Communist?"  Dr.  Dan  said
in  answer  to  a  question.   "If  someone talks  in  favor  of Hanoi
Ky  Highly  Regarded—On  Formosa
"Taipeh   (DPI)—The  Nationalist  Chinese  would  not
make   any    official    comment   but   is   [sic]    apparently
pleased   with   Vietnamese  Premier   Nguyen  Cao   Ky's
suggestion  that  the   U.S.  bomb  the  Chinese  mainland.
Ky  was  reported  to  have  told  Washington  that   [this
was]  the  only  way  to  win  the  Vietnamese   war."
—Saigon  Daily  News, April  15.
or  against  the  Americans,  I  would  bar  that  as  pro-Commu-
nist.    The  Americans  are   our   most  important   ally.    Few
Vietnamese  are  anti-American  because  they  knew  the   U.S.
has  no  colonial  ambitions.    I  also  would  allow  no  candidate
to  speak for  a negotiated  peace.  That would  create  confusion.
I  am  not  against   asking  Hanoi  to  withdraw  its  troops  and
then  come  to  the  conference table  but  I  am  against  a  cease-
fire,  for  we  are  not  the  aggressors.
"The  Buddhist Institute  is  ambiguous  on  all  this.    Some-
times  it  sounds  as  if  it  were  for  peace  at  any  price.    The
Buddhists   should   remember  what   happened   to   Tibet—the
most   Buddhist   country   in   the    world—under    Communist
domination."
More  Optimistic  Than  Any  American
Dr.   Dan   was   more  optimistic   than   any   American   with
whom  I  spoke  or  any  American  of  whom  I  heard.   "We  are
much  closer  to  victory  than  the  Americans  think,"  he  said.
"Basically   our   people   are   immunized   against   Communist
propaganda.   The  inflation  is  not  as  serious  as  some  contend.
After   all  we  do  have   full   employment.    Now  if  we  get   a
strong   administration,  and  get   ahead  with  pacification,  the
war  can  be  won  in  a  relatively  short  time.    Peace  will  come
not  through  negotiations  but  through   military  victory."
The  French   tried   operating   through   a   puppet   monarch,
Bao  Dai.    We  tried  operating  through  a  Mandarin  dictator
and  then  a  series  of  military  regimes.    We  have  yet  to  play
the  card   represented   by  Dr.  Dan;  some  Americans  are   al-
ready  talking   of  this   as  our  next   move.    It   could  open  a
fresh   period   of   suffering   and  disillusion.
Next  Week:  The  Outlook  for  Peace  as  Seen
•    From  Saigon
Why   Not   Start  A  Gift  Sub  With  These  On-the  Spot  Reports  from  Vietnam  and  Cambodia
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly       5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
5/16/66
For  the  enclosed   $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   .............................:................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  /"/ announcement wished  D
/ F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.   W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,   D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,   the  last   week   in   December   and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618   Nebraska  Ave..     N.W..    Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.   Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:     $6   in   Canada:    J10   elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED