I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jun06.pdf

============================================================

Behind  the Attacks  on SNCQ  P.  3
Diseases  Not  Usually  Acquired  in  Sunday  School
"If   you  could  read  about  the  deeds  they  are  doing,  you
wouldn't  be  talking  about  brothels  in  Vietnam,  you  would
be  talking  about  Sunday  schools.  .  .  ."
—Dr.  George  H.  Davis,  National  City  Christian   Church,
preaching  a  sermon  with  LBJ  present,  May  28.
The  top  U.S.  military  surgeon  in  Saigon,  Col.   Spurgeon
H.  Neel,  Jr.,   according  to  The  Medical  Tribune  (April  13),
reported  venereal  disease  the  No.  1  ailment  of  U.S.  troops
in  Vietnam, with  18,383  cases  in  1965,  "more  than  twice  the
number   of  diarrheal  diseases,  the   next   most   prevalent."
The  same   account  said   there   were   22,000  U.S.  troops   in
Vietnam  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  and   180,000  at   the
end,   or  an  average  of  102,000.   This  means  almost  one  serv-
iceman  in  five  contracted  VD.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  20JUNE  6,  1966
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Cost  of Ky's  Little  Triumphs
Malcolm  Muggeridge  in  reviewing  Kerensky's  Memoirs  for
the  London  Observer  May  29  says  Kerensky   "contends  the
Allied  Governments  secretly  favored  and  helped  the  Kornilov
counter-revolutionary   conspiracy"   against   "Russia's   one   and
only   essay  in  genuinely  representative  government"   because
they  thought   a  military  dictatorship  "would  strengthen   Rus-
sia's  will  and  capacity to  continue  with  the  war."    The  Allies
thus   weakened   Kerensky  and   helped   the   Bolsheviks.     The
parallel with  events  in  South  Vietnam  is striking.   The  armed
repression  of  dissident  Buddhist  elements  with  American  en-
couragement  is  in  the  pattern  of  our  Vietnamese   policy.  Fear
of   a   democratic   regime   and   reliance   on   dictatorship   have
polarized  the  country's  politics  between  right  and  left  to  the
latter's  advantage  by  leaving  the  opposition   with  no  alterna-
tives  but  submission  or  the  National  Liberation  Front.    The
crushing  of  the  Buddhists  is  from  this  point  of  view  a  poli-
tical  victory for  the  NLF.
Secretary  Rusk's  Complacency
The   Administration  cannot   afford   to  see  this.    To   recog-
nize  it  would  be  to  admit  that  U.S.   policy  has  been   wrong
from   the  start.     So  Secretary  Rusk  at  press  conference  May
27  told  us  complacently,  "Well,  the  political   problem,  thus
far,    has  been  centered   in  the  northeast   corner   of   the   First
Corps,  and  at  the  present  time  primarily  in  the  town  of  Hue
and  with  a  certain  group  in  Saigon.    The  rest  of  the  country
has  been  proceeding   in  more  or  less  normal  fashion.  .  .  ."!
It  would  be  more  correct  to  say  that  open  opposition  to  the
military  dictatorship  in  the  territory  it  controls  is  at   present
localized  in  Hue  and  Saigon.    But  that  is  not  the  same  as  the
political  problem.    The  political  problem  is that  there  is  little
popular   support   for   the   military  dictatorship.     The   rebel
Buddhist   radio  in  Hue  put  its  finger  on  the  problem   in  a
broadcast  May  26  which  was monitored  here  but  not  reported
in  the  press.    The  Hue  radio  objected  to  "unconditional  sup-
port"  by  the  U.S.  of  one-man  rule.    "From  Ngo  Dinh  Diem
to  Nguyen  Khanh,  Tran  Van  Huong  and  now  Thieu-Ky,  the
Vietnamese  people  have  vainly  asked  the  U.S.   Administration
to  abandon  this  unrealistic policy."     It  said  "The   U.S.  must
be   the   friend   and   ally   of   Vietnam   in   the  anti-Communist
struggle.     But  the  U.S.  must  not  be  the  master  of  Vietnam."
Unless  this  policy  is  changed  "the  Vietnamese  people  cannot
let  the  Americans take  this territory  at  any  price."
At  The  Very  Moment  LBJ  Was
Deriding  Goldwater
An   extraordinary  statement,   which   has   gone   re-
markably  unnoticed,  was  made by  the  New  York  Times
May  20  in  a  lead  editorial,  "Blow  the  Whistle  on  Sai-
gon."   It  said,  "In  the  summer  of  1964 Premier Khanh
was  promised  a  bombing  offensive  against  the  North,
presumably  on presidential authority, to  extract  pledges
from   Saigon  of   governmental  stability  and   efficacity.
When  the  bombing  of  the  North  finally  began  the  fol-
lowing  winter,  its   primary  objective—as  explained  by
the  highest  American  officials  in  Saigon—was  to  stab-
ilize  the   politics  of   South  Vietnam."   We   put  aside
the   political   idiocy   which  could  assume  that  bombing
Hanoi   would   stabilize  Saigon.     The   important   point
here  is  that, if  this  is  true,  the  Johnson  Administration
had  secretly   promised  a  sharp  escalation  of   the  war
at   the   very   time   Johnson   was  campaigning  against
Goldwater,  and  deriding the  idea  of  extending  the  con-
flict  to  the  North.   We  believe  so  serious  a  statement
in  the  country's leading  newspaper calls  for Senatorial
inquiry   and  a  request  for   explanation  by   the  White
House.
This  is  the  voice  of  a  nationalist and  not  a  pro-Communist
opposition.  But  to  admit  this  would  be  to  blur  the  cozy black-
and-white  of  the  Administration's  war  propaganda.  The  basic
truth  of  which one  must  not  lose  sight  is that  we  do  not  know
what  the  Vietnamese  people  are  thinking.   There  is  no   free
press  through  which  they  can  express  themselves.    Any  ques-
tioning  of  the  war  risks  imprisonment.    It  is  through  mass
demonstrations  like  those  of  the  Buddhists  that  we  get  some
idea  of  dissatisfaction under  the  surface.   Of  course,  a major
indicator  of  something  fundamentally  wrong  is  that  the  Viet
Cong,  with  a  force  only  one-third  the   size  of   that  arrayed
against  them,  appear  able  to  hold  more  territory  than  we  do,
and   to  retake  "liberated"  areas  as  soon   as  our  troops  with-
draw.    In  the  current  crisis  it  is  revealing  that   no  voice  is
raised  for  continuation  of  the  Thieu-Ky  regime.    Even  those
opposed  to  elections  at  this  time  are  for  a  broader-based   and
more  representative  government.    This  is  where  the  hard-line
Catholics   join   the  dissident   Buddhists.     In   supporting    the
military  dictatorship,  and  its  repressive  actions,  we  are  I  be-
lieve  setting  ourselves against  the  majority  of  the   Vietnamese
people.
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  6,1966
From  the  Testimony  Fulbright  Elicited  In  Putting  The  Vietnam   Conflict  "On The  Couch"
Senators For The First Time Are Given A Look Into The Deeper Roots of War
The   role  of  psychological   factors  in  international  conflict
has  not  gone  unnoticed  by  national  leaders.     Gen.  Douglas
MacArthur   addressing  the   American   Legion   in   1955   said,
"The   present  tensions  with  their  threat  of  national  annihila-
tion  are  kept  alive  by  two  great  illusions.    The  one,  a  com-
plete  belief  on  the  part  of  the  Soviet  world  that  the  capitalist
countries  are preparing  to  attack  it  ...    the  other,  a  complete
bejief   on  the  part  of  the  capitalist  countries  that  the  Soviet
are  preparing  to  attack  us.  ...     Both  are  wrong.    Each  side,
so  far   as  the   masses  are   concerned,   is  equally   desirous  of
peace.    For  either  side,  war  with  the  other  would  mean  noth-
ing  but  disaster.  .  .  .  But  the  constant  acceleration  of  prepa-
ration  may  well,  without  specific  intent,  ultimately  produce  a
spontaneous  combustion"   (Readers  Digest,  May  1955-).  .  .  .
The  Other  Is  Always  The  Wicked  One
When  nations  are  in  conflict,  the  images  of  each  other  that
they  form  regularly  take  on  the  same  features.    Each  adver-
sary  sees  itself  as  peacefully  inclined  and  the  other  as  aggres-
sive.     Sometimes  .each   regards   the   citizens  of   the   other   as
friendly   but  misled  by  their  leaders.     Today   American  and
Chinese  statesmen  each  assert  that  the  Chinese  and  American
peoples  are  well-disposed   toward   each  other;  it  is  only  the
leaders  on  the  other  side  who  are  responsible  for  the  conflict.
.  .  .  Once   nations  find  themselves  in  a  position   of   mutual
antagonism,  each  interprets  the  actions  of  the  other  as  based
on  bad  motives,  just  as  its  own  actions  always  spring   from
good  ones. ...
A  psychologically crucial  part  of  the  reality  world   of  any
group  is  its  beliefs  about  the  nature  of  existence.    Every  per-
son   has  to   shield  himself   somehow   from   the   unendurable
realization  that  his  individual life  is  a  very  transitory  and  in-
significant   event  in  an  ongoing   universe.     He   does   this  by
embracing  an  ideology  or  religion  that  links  his  life  to  some
larger,  more  enduring  purpose.   . For  many  this  is  an  abstrac-
tion  like  God  or  Democracy  or  Communism.  .  .  .  For  many
persons  surrendering  the  belief   that  gives  meaning  to  their
lives  and  links  them  to  their  group  would  be  intolerable.  .  .  .
The  existence of  a group  that  holds  an  ideology  different  from
our  own  creates  anxiety.    Why?    Because  the  very  fact   that
they   maintain   different   beliefs   implies  that   ours   might   be
wrong.  .  .  .
In  the  Vietnam war,  for  both  sides psychological  issues  have
become  very  important.    From   a  strictly  materialistic  stand-
The  Pitfalls  of  Calculated  Escalation
Is  it  possible  to  escalate  the  intensity  of  attack  upon
an  opponent  with  one  hand  while  simultaneously  hold-
ing  out  an  olive  Branch  in  the  other?   'I  do  not  believe
this  is  psychologically  feasible. ...  An  opponent can
be  bombed   into   surrender,  or  even   into  non-existence
but  he  cannot  be  bombed  into  honest  negotiations.  .  .  .
No  one  in  his  right   mind  wants  a  full-scale  nuclear
war.    Therefore  escalation  as  a  strategy  comes  down
to  know   when   and  how  to  get   off  the  escalator.    But
it   is   always   the   opponent   who   is   supposed   to   back
down. ...  If  the  U.S.   is  indeed  experimenting  with
calculated   escalation   as  a  strategy   for  dealing  with
'wars  of   national  liberation,'  then   I   think   we   are   in
danger  of  swallowing  a  baited  hook.  .  .  .  The  hook  is
psychological.  .  .  .  Physically  escalators  can  run  down
just   as   easily   as   up  but  psychologically   it   is   much
easier  to  keep  on  going  up  than  to  stop  and  back  down.
—Prof.   Chas.  E.   Osgood,  Univ.  of  Illinois  psycholo-
gist   before   Senate   Foreign  Relations   Com.,  May  25.
point,  the  territory  of  Vietnam  is  of  limited  strategic  import-
ance  to  us,  and  the  Vietcong  would  be  much  better  off  eco-
nomically  if  they  peacefully  acquiesced  in  our  presence.     But
' we  see  behind   the  struggle   for   territory  such   psychological
issues  as whether  our  will  or  that  of  China  is  stronger,  wheth-
er  other   nations  can  trust   our   commitments   and   above   all
whose  view of  the world  will  eventually prevail.  .  . .
Thus  the  Vietnam  war  has  assumed  an  ideological   charac-
ter  similar  to  the  holy  wars  of   former   times,  and   this  has
ominous   implications.     People   who   are   fighting   for   their
ideals  seldom  if  ever  can  be  forced  into  surrender  by  punish-
ment.  .  .  .  To  suffer  and  die  for  a  holy  cause  is  highly  vir-
tuous,  and  one  hopes  through   example  to  convert  others  by
one's  own  sacrifice.    The  notion  that  one  can  cause  people  to
abandon  their   ideologies  by  inflicting  pain  on  them   should
have  died  in  Rome  with  the  Christian  martyrs.
In  contrast  to  wars  fought   for  tangible  spoils,   ideological
wars  have  no  natural end  point.    As  a  result,  in  the  past  they
have   characteristically  been   stopped   only   by  exhaustion   of
both  sides  after   tremendous  carnage,  with  the  survivors  still
clinging  to  their  respective  beliefs.    Today,  with  weapons  of
unlimited  destructive  power  lurking  in  the  wings,  such  wars
threaten  to  expand  until  they  destroy  civilization.
—Dr.  Jerome  D.   Frank,  Professor    of   Psychiatry   at  Johns
Hopkins,  before   Senate Foreign  Relations  May  25.
Why  The  "White"  Man  Is  Distrusted   Among  Darker  Peoples  Everywhere
Dr.   Brock    CHISHOLM    (former    Director   General,   the
World  Health  Organization):  One  of  the  areas,  I  think,   in
which  we,  of  the  pinkish  people  or  so-called  white   people,
do  need  to  do  a  great  deal  of  thinking  is  about  our  reputa-
tion  on  earth.    The  white  man,   so-called,  is  not  evaluated
by  his  own  standards  all  over  the  world,  because  the  white
man's  standards  are  very  clear  cut.    He  is  a  good  one,  and
this  is  very  clear  to  the  people  who  have  been  brought  up
in  particular  situations  and  particular  groups.
But   to   the   vast   majority   of   the   world's   peoples   this
simply  does  not  obtain.    To  most  of  the  world's  people,  the
white   man  it  seems  is  the  bad  one.     He  is  the  man  who
moved   in  on   their   ancestors,  slaughtered   many   of   them,
captured  them,  sold  them  into  slavery,  exploited  their  natu-
ral  resources  for his  own benefit  .  .  .  and this  is  overwhelm-
ingly  the  common   feeling  about  the  white  man  practically
all  over  the  world.    It  is  possible  for  people  all  over  the
world   to  cooperate  with  white   people,  but  they  do  it  still
with  their  fingers  crossed,  watching  carefully   for  the   gim-
mick   which  will  be  for  the  benefit  of  the  white  man  .  .  .
and  it  will  take  a  very  long  time  for  the  white  man  to  live
down  that  reputation   because  it  was,   in  fact,   a  very  well-
deserved  reputation.
Sen.   GORE  (D.  Tenn):  Is  this  true  in  Vietnam   today?
Dr.  CHISHOLM:  Yes,  all  over  Southeast  Asia.  .  .  .
—Senate  Foreign  Relations   Committee,  May  25.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  6,  1966
A  Cruelly  Disproportionate  Sentence
We  are  glad  to  add our voice to  the  many  which have
been  raised  for  reducing  or  suspending  the  sentence  of
5  years  in jail  imposed on  Ralph  Ginzburg,  publisher  of
Eros  for  sending  obscene   material  through  the  mail.
The  sentence   is   all   out  of   proportion  to   the   offense,
especially  since  Edward  Mishkin,  whose  conviction  was
also  upheld  by  the  Supreme Court,  was  given  only three
years  in jail  for  publishing  hard-core pornography with
no  excuse  whatsoever,  medical  or  aesthetic  as  in  Ginz-
burg's  case.    We  believe  the  14  opinions  handed down
by  the  Court  in  these  two  cases   reflect  the  impossible
task  imposed upon it  of  acting  as  a  censor  of  literature.
Our  earlier  comment  on  the  cases  dealt  with  a  differ-
ent  question.   We  believe  the  First  Amendment, which
embodies  the   most  precious  heritage  of   free   society,
establishes  duties  as  well  as  rights.    We  believe  that
liberals  who  try  to  make  a  fast  and  dirty  buck  on  the
side  by  pornography, betray .the  cause  of  freedom.  But
we  would  not  send  a  man  to  jail  because  he  disagrees.
Behind  the  Hostile  Press  Campaign  Unleashed  by  the  Election  of  Stokely  Carmichael
SNCC Does Not Wish to Become A New  Version of the White Man's Burden
We  hope  white  liberals  will  not  be  taken  in  by  the  press
campaign  against  the  Student  Non-Violent  Coordinating Com-
mittee  since  Stokely  Carmichael  succeeded  John  Lewis  as  na-
tional  chairman.    White  sympathizers  with  the  Negro  have to
keep  several  things  in  mind.    One  is  that  in  any  movement
the  leverage  exerted  by  the  moderates  depends  on  the  exist-
ence  of   an  extremist  fringe.    The   second   is  that   a  certain
amount   of   black   nationalism  is  inevitable  among   Negroes;
they  cannot  reach  equality  without  the   restoration  of   pride
in  themselves as  Negroes.     The   third   is  that  this  cannot  be
achieved  unless  they  learn   to  fight  for   themselves,  not  just
as  wards  of  white  men,  no  matter  how  sympathetic.    SNCC
is  reacting against a  new  version  of  the  White  Man's Burden.
Fresh  Approach  to  Southern  Politics
No  white man  really  knows what  it  is  like  to  be  shut  into
the  ghetto.    "The  Negro,"  as  Martin  Luther  King  said  in  a
vivid  phrase  on  CBS Face  The  Nation  May  29,  "is  still  smoth-
ering  in  an  air-tight  cage  of  poverty  in  the  midst  of  this  very
affluent   society."    For   the   white  sympathizer,   the   struggle
against  the  ghetto  is  an  act  of  philanthropy;  for  the  Negro,
it  is  a  battle  to  save  himself,  not  just  from  poverty  but  from
a   corrosive  self-contempt.   The  ghetto   dweller  distrusts  the
white   SNCC   worker.    Mr.   Carmichael's  idea   of  recruiting
black  SNCC  workers from  Northern  ghettoes  is  psychological-
ly  sound.    His  idea  of  using  white  SNCC  workers  to  organ-
ize  the  Southern  poor  white  to  the  point  where  joint  action
between  white  and  black  becomes  possible  opens  fresh  pers-
pectives  in  Southern politics.
The  wonderful  white  boys  and  girls  who  went   South   in
the  past  few  years  helped  to  thaw  out  the  Negro  from  poli-
tical  deep  freeze.     But  now  that  the  battle  has  shifted  from
the   simpler   symbolic   acts   of  sitting  at  a  segregated   lunch
counter  or  in  a  segregated  waiting  room  to  the  harder  and
more  complicated tasks  of  winning  a  real  economic  and  social
equality,  the  job  will  have  to  be  done  by Negroes  themselves.
These   are   not   tasks   for   a   summer   adventure   in    between
classes.    They  can  only  be  accomplished   if  Negroes  are  mo-
bilized  to  carry  on  for  themselves.    In  such  areas  as  the  Black
Belt,  where  the  Negro  is  a  majority,  this  means  seeking  ma-
jority  rule  and  that  means  Negro  majorities.    Otherwise   the
Negro   is  at   the   mercy  of   a  white   minority.     In   Lowndes
county,  Alabama,  for  example,  where  the  Negro  third  party,
Black  Panther  movement,  originated,   the   white   Sheriff   has
deputized  every  white  man  over  21.    To  be  a  deputy  is  to
have  the  right  to  carry  a  gun,  and  to  have  a  kind  of  hunting
license  to  shoot   Negroes.
This  is  the  background   against   which  one  must  read  Car-
michael's  statement,  "We  feel  that  integration  is  irrelevant;  it
is  just  a  substitute  for  white  supremacy.   We  have  got  to  go
after  political power."    He  asked  an  audience  in  Washington
last   week-end,   "How   are  you  going  to   integrate  a   share-
cropper   making  $3  a  day  with   a  plantation-owner   making
$20,000  a  year?"
Some  people  were  shocked  by  Mr.  Carmichael's  angry  re-
mark,  "We  want  quality  education,  not  integrated   education."
But  here  I  believe  he  expresses  the  reaction  of  Southern   Ne-
groes   to  the  bitter  experience  of  integration.    The   Wall   St.
6 *
Journal   (May  26)   carried  a  story,   "The   Invisible  Wall"  on
the  ostracism  and  the  humiliation  visited  on  those  few  Ne-
groes  who  have  often  literally  risked  their  lives  to  get   into
white  schools.    Many  are  leaving.    This  frightened   handful
in  white  schools  only  distracts attention  from  the  need  for  first
rate  education  in  the  Negro  schools.    This  is  just  as  true  in
the  North  where  the  Negro  schools  are  segregated  by  the
flight  to  the  suburbs.    Only  by  improved  schooling   can  the
Negro  be  fitted  to  compete  as  an  equal   in  a  hostile   white
world.    To  dismiss  this  as  Negro  nationalism  is  neither   fair
nor  perceptive.
Of  course  the  main  reason  for  the  campaign  against  SNCC
is  the  statement  it  issued  refusing  to  take  part  in  the  White
House   Conference   on   Civil   Rights  which   convened   as  we
were  going  to  press.    "Our  organization,"  it  said,  "is  opposed
to  war  in  Vietnam  and  we  cannot  in  good  conscience   meet
with  the  chief  policy  maker  of  the  Vietnam  war  to   discuss
human  rights  when  he  violates  the  human  rights  of  colored
people  in   Vietnam."
High  Ratio  of  Negro  Combat  Troops
This  speaks  the  unspoken  thoughts  of  many  Negroes.    The
war  is  an  affront   to  them.    The  proportion  of  Negroes  in
combat  troops  Joseph  Alsop  reported   May  25  was  "running
above  20  percent  in  the  average  infantry  company"   because
Negro  recruits,   with  a  lower   average  of  technical   skills,  are
less  likely  to  be  assigned  to  one  of  the  technical  specialties."
The  ratio  in  combat  units  is  thus  almost   twice  the  Negro's
ratio  to  population.     The   same  discrimination  that   deprived
Negroes  of  education  puts  them  into  the  front  ranks  of  battle
in  a  struggle  supposedly   to  preserve  abroad  a  democracy  de-
nied  them  at  home.    How  can  they  be  blamed   if  they,   like
so many Vietnamese,  see this  as  another  white  man's  war?
But  the  main  point,  as Dr.  King expressed  it  on TV,  is that
the  war  is wasting  the  money  and  the  energy  which  can  alone
rehabilitate  the  Negro  and  bring  him  fully  into  the  American
community.    Dr.   King   sounded   very   radical   when   he   said
this  would   cost  $10  billion  a  year  for  ten  years.    The  Viet-
namese  war  already  costs  more  than  that,  and  the  price  will
rise  as  it  escalates.     Is  it  any  wonder  SNCC  feels   bitter?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, June  6,1968
Buddhist Daily  Shut Down For Publishing Non-Buddhist Protest Against Ky
(Continued  from   Page  One)
A  curious  affair  no  reporter  on  the  scene  has  investigated
merits  attention  in  this  respect.    On  May  26  the  Saigon  radio
broadcast  without  comment  the  text  of  a  resolution   adopted
by  "The  Front  of  Citizens  of  Various  Religions."    This  was
signed  by  three  Catholics,  including  their  best  known  leader,
Father  Quynh;  and  two  representatives  each  of  the  Hoa  Hao,
the  Cao  Dai,  the  Protestants  and  a  moderate  Buddhist  group
opposed  to  Tri  Quang.    Of  the  Cao Dai  and  Hoa  Hao  sign-
ers,  one  each  was  a  General;  both  these  sects  have  their  own
armed  forces.    The  resolution  said  that  after  three  years  of
military  rule,  the  situation  "has constantly  and  seriously  de-
teriorated  in  all  political,  military  and  economic   fields."   It
asked  General  Thieu  and  General  Ky to  resign  "to  safeguard
solidarity  in  the  ranks  of  the  army  and  the  people."    It  did
not  call  for  elections  but  it  asked  the  Armed  Forces  Council
to  set  up  "a  transitional  civilian  government  which  can  unite
the  people."    Einally—and  this  probably  explains  why  the
broadcast  got  by  Saigon's  erratic  and  not  too  bright  censors—
it  called  on  the  people  and  the  army  "to  unite  closely  as fish
and  water  to  realize  the  anti-Communist  national   salvation
struggle."   This  echoed  Mao  Tse-tung's  famous  maxim  about
the  guerrilla  living  among  the  people  as  a  fish  in  water,  but
turned  it  to  anti-Communist  purposes   in  the  fashion  set  by
our  special  CIA-trained  "pacification  teams."
They  Made It  Unanimous
The  signers  of  this  manifesto  represented   those   religious
elements   which   support   the  war  and  oppose  the   dissident
Buddhists.    In  calling  for  the  resignations  of  Thieu  and  Ky,
they  were  therefore   making  the   Buddhist   demand   all  but
unanimous.   The  manifesto was published  in Dat  To  (Father-
land),  a  Buddhist daily.   Next  day it  was  closed  down  by  the
military  junta for  failing  to  observe  censorship  and  for  print-
ing  unspecified "false  news  reports"  (New  York  Times,  May
27).   A  day later  Saigon  radio broadcast  a  short  statement by
Father  Quynh  declaring  the  manifesto "entirely  distorted  and
harmful  in  the  present  situation."    He  did  not  say the  mani-
festo  was  a  fabrication,  nor  that  the  other  signatories  agreed
with  this  disavowal.   It  bore  all  the  earmarks of  having  been
James  R.  Newman
It   is   painful   to   record  the   sudden  death   at   58  of
James   R.  Newman.    He  wielded  one  of   the  sharpest
pens., of  our  time,  and  he  wielded  it   in  the  cause  of
peace  and  sanity. His  famous  review  of  Herman  Kahn's
On  Thermonuclear  War  for  the  Scientific  American,  be-
ginning  "Is  there  a  Herman   Kahn?"  was   more  than
literature;  it  was  murder;  no  victim  ever  deserved  it
more.   His  little  book,  "The  Rule  of  Folly" is  a  classic
satire  in  the struggle  against atomic  war.   Newman  en-
listed  in  this  early.   As  counsel  to  McMahon's  Special
Senate   Committee   on   Atomic   Energy   in   1945-46   he
mobilized  the  scientific  community  in a  successful battle
to  keep  atomic  development  from  military  control.    In
Science  and  Sensibility  may  be  found  some  of  his  at-
tacks  on  McCarthyism  and  the  atmosphere created  by
the  Truman-Acheson  cold  war.   These,  to  his  credit,
shut  him  out  of   public  life.    He  was   doubly   rare—a
lawyer  who  could   write  and  a  writer  who  knew   the
world  of  science  and  mathematics.  The  book  he  wrote
with  Prof.  Edward  Kasner,  Mathematics  and  the  Imag-
ination,  turned  an  abstruse  subject  into  poetry,  as  do
many   of   his  prefaces  in   the   4-volume  anthology  he
edited,  The  World  of  Mathematics.   The  country  lost  a
gifted  citizen, and we  a  dear  friend.
obtained  under  pressure,  especially  since  Father  Quynh  has
made  similar  and  more  outspoken  anti-Ky  statements  on  his
own,  notably  in  an  interview  with  UPI   (Washington   Post,
March  27)  in  which he  said  Ky's rule was worse than  Diem's.
This  incident  shows  how  widely opposition  has  spread  and
how  deluded  our  government  is  in  dismissing  Buddhist  pro-
test  as  of  limited  significance.    Under  the  surface  a  latent
second  civil  war  is  far  from  suppressed.   This  recalls  another
passage  I  noticed  in  Kerensky's  Memoirs  when  I  looked  into
them  for  myself.    "There  was  one  thing  the  Allies  failed  to
take  into  account,"  Kerensky  wrote,   "when   they  lent  their
support  to  Kornilov.    It  did  not  occur  to  them  that,  having
seized  power,  the  military  dictator  would  not  have  had  time
for  the  imperialist  war—all  his  efforts  would  have  been  di-
rected  toward  civil  war."  This  is .what  is  happening  to  the
Ky  dictatorship  in  South  Vietnam,  and  this  is  why  our  troops
are  carrying the  brunt  of  the  war  against  the  Viet  Cong.
You  Con Still Start  A  Gift  Sub With  Stone's  Four On-the-Spot  Reports  from  Vietnam   and  Cambodia
I. F.  Stone's Weekly     5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew  (or  enter)  a   nub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   .......................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
6/6/66
For  the  enclosed  $5 send  a  gift  sob  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street  ......................................................................................
CHy  ..........................................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fiftiet
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
I. R Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Pottage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday   except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.. Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the  U.S.;  $6  in   Canada;   (10   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$16  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED