I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966mar28.pdf

============================================================

Pornography  and  the 1st Amendment,  P.  2
Our  No.  1  Pollution Problem Is  Pollution  of  the  Mind
There  is  a  kind  of  madness  in  the  facile  assumption  that
we  can  raise  the  many  billions  of  dollars  necessary   to  re-
build  our  schools  and  cities  and  public  transport  and  elimi-
nate  the  pollution of  air  and water  while  also  spending  tens
of   billions   to   finance   an   "open  ended"  war   in  Asia,  but
even  if  the  material  resources  can  somehow  be  drawn  from
an  expanding  economy I  do  not  think  that  the  spiritual  re-
sources  will  be  forthcoming  from  an  angry  and disappointed
people.    Wars  breed  war  fever;  when  a  nation  is  involved
in  a  bitter  foreign  conflict,   hopes   give  way  to  fears  and
creative  and  generous   attitudes   give  way  to  a  false  and
strident  patriotism.   That,  I  believe,  is  what  is  happening
in  America  today.
—Sen. Fulbright  at  the  Univ.  of  Conn., March  22
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  12
MARCH  28,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
The  Un-Intelligence   of U.S.  Intelligence  in  Vietnam
Several  important  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  the  new
political  crisis  in  South  Vietnam.    The  first  is  that  our  in-
telligence  agencies  continue  to  be  poorly  informed.   The  same
kind  of  wishful  thinking  appears  which  proved  so  disastrous
all  through  the  Diem  period  and  since.    Only  a  few  weeks
after  the  prestige  of  the  American  Presidency  was  linked  with
that  of  Ky,  the  stability of  his  regime  turns  out  to  be  shaky.
One  way  to  see how  illusion-prone  our  government  remains  is
to  look  back  at  the  following  tribute  to  a  Vietnamese   leader:
He  is  only  ——  years  old.    He  has  had  little   political
experience,   but  despite   these  handicaps   he  brings  an  ac-
tive,  imaginative,  energetic   personality   to  the  position  of
head  of  state.   He  has  already  instituted  a  number  of  re-
forms.    He  has  laid  out  a  national  mobilization  plan.   He
is  taking  his  story  to  the  people.   He  recognizes  that  the
defeat  of  the  Vietcong  in  the  long  run  depends  on  political
and  economic  action.
The  words  are  indistinguishable  from  those   used   about  Ky
since   Honolulu.     Actually   they   were   applied   by  Secretary
McNamara  just  two  years  ago  to  General  Khanh  in  a  House
Appropriations   Committee  hearing   (March   24,  1964),  when
McNamara  told  the  Congressmen,  "Investigation  on  the  scene,
including  consultation  with  all  of  the  leading  U.S.  representa-
tives  on  the  spot,  military  and  civilian,  convinced  us that  Gen-
eral  Khanh  does  have  general  support."    A  few  months  later,
despite  all  those,  barn-storming  pictures  showing  Khanh  and
McNamara   with   linked   hands   held  high   in  the  ait   before
groups  of  peasants  obviously  puzzled  by  their  antics,   Khanh
was  overthrown,*  and  has  since  vanished without  a  trace  from
his  country's   politics.
The  Inside  Dope  They  Share
To  paraphrase  the  Secretary,  investigation  convinces  us  that
the   leading  U.S.  representatives  on   the   spot,   military   and
civilian,  didn't  know  what  was going  on  then  and  don't  know
what  is  going  on  now.   They  seem  to  have  as  little  compre-
hension   of   what  ordinary   Vietnamese  are  thinking  as  any
More  Pentagon  Fakery
Last  Jan.  5  the  head  of   the   U.S.  medical  aid  pro-
gram  in  Vietnam  told  a  press  conference  in  Washing-
ton  that  the  war  was  causing  more  casualties  to  civil-
ians  than  to  the  military  (Wash.  Star,  Jan.  6).    All
through  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations Committee hear-
ings,  Senator  Pell  and  Chairman  Fulbright  sought   in
vain  to  get  some  estimate  from  State  or  Pentagon  of
civilians  killed.   Then  on  March  17,  Rep.  Zablocki  (D.,
Wis)  of  House  Foreign  Affairs  made  public  a  report  on
a  visit  to  Vietnam in  February  in  which  he  said  some-
thing  should  be  done  about  "the  high  level  of  civilian
casualties."    He  said  that  "some  recent  search  and  de-
stroy  operations  have  resulted  in  six  civilian casualties
to  one  Vietcong."    He  estimated  it  was  "likely"  that
two  civilians were being killed  for  every Vietcong.  Next
day  the  Pentagon  released  a  letter  from  Assistant  Sec-
retary  of  Defense  John  T.  McNaughton to   Chairman
Fulbright   claiming   that   only   109  civilians   had  been
killed  and  170  injured  in  the  seven  months  from   last
Aug.    1  to  March  1!    These  figures  are  preposterously
low.     According to  Zablocki's  estimate,  14,000  civilians
were  killed  in  January  and  February.  McNaughton list-
ed  only  6  killed  in  those  two  months  and  claimed that
this  showed  our forces  were  using  their  firepower "with
increasingly  greater  accuracy  and  discrimination." But
the  Washington  Star  (Aug.19)   gave   the  game  away
when   it   reported  that   these   figures   "apparently  are
based  on claims  for civilian damages filed with the  Viet-
namese  government.    No  other  overall  records  of  civil-
ian  casualties  exist.  .  .  ."  Too  few  Vietnamese  know
where  Saigon  is,   much  less  that  they  can  file  claims
for   deaths  from   our  bombers.
'For  this  delicious  tidbit  we  cheerfully   acknowledge  our
indebtedness   to  the  Secretary   himself.    We  found  it  among
30  pages  of  past  statements  he  inserted  in  this  year's  Senate
appropriations   hearings   on   the   Vietnamese   supplemental
budget  to  prove  he  has  not  been  as  unreliable on  Vietnam  as
his  critics  claim.   We  suggest   the  IBM  computer which  sup-
plied  the  quotes  be  rechecked  for  security.
other-worldly  passengers  on  those  Unidentified  Flying   Objects
over  Ann  Arbor  the  other  day  may  have  had  of  Soapy   Wil-
liams'  chances  of  making  the  U.S.  Senate.    To  check  back  on
the  dispatches  when  General  Thi  was  ousted   makes  one  feel
that  our  little  joke  is,  if  anything,  unfair  to  the  Martians.
Ward   Just  reported   from   Saigon   to   the   Washington   Post
March  12  that  he  had   been   "authoritatively"  told  the   U.S.
Embassy  was  informed  in  advance  of  Ky's  move  against  Thi,
and  "the   American  reaction"  was  favorable  because  our  men
in   Saigon   thought  the  dismissal  would   "inevitably   give  the
government   more  confidence  and  authority."    Charles  Mohr
also  reported   to  the  New   York   Times  March   11,  "U.S.    offi-
(Continued   on  Page   Four)
4    'i
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  28,1966
The  Real  Treason  of  the  Intellectuals  Who  Pander  for  A  Quick  and  Easy  Buck
The  Flood  of Pornography  Threatens  Respect  for  the  First  Amendment
What  we  find  offensive  in  the  obscenity  cases  is  the  postur-
ing  of  Ralph  Ginzburg,  one  of  the  main  defendants.     "Amer-
ica  is  no  longer   a  peace-loving  country,"  Ginzburg  told   the
press  after  the  Supreme  Court  upheld  his  conviction,  "but   it
is   also  no   longer   a  liberty-loving country."     This   effort   to
cloak  himself  in  the  mantle  of  Thomas  Jefferson,   and  at  the
same  time grab  onto  the  coat-tails of  the  peace  movement,- was
characteristic  of  a  young  man  who  seems  to  come  straight  out
of  What  Makes  Sammy  Run.  The  evidence  at  the  trial  showed
how  far  he  would  go  for  a  dubious  dollar.  Originally  he  tried
to  mail  his   publications  from   two   tiny   rural   postoffices   in
Pennsylvania,   one  called  Intercourse  and  the  other  Blue  Balls,
in  order  to  exploit  the  off-color  suggestion  in  their postmarks.
Since  neither  was  large  enough  to  handle  the  anticipated  vol-
ume  of  mail,  his  application  was  denied  and  he  had  to  settle
for   Middlesex   [get   it?],  N.J.      A  publisher  who   spent  so
much  effort  on  such  adolescent  outhouse   leers  was  engaged  in
a  pretty   tasteless  operation.     This   bore  as  much   relation   to
what  Jefferson   meant  by  freedom   of  the   press   as  running  a
bawdy  house  does  to  freedom  of  assembly.
Too  Much  for  Nine  Old  Men
But  since  Ginzburg's   operations   were  in  print,  they  raised
difficult  constitutional  questions.    The   difficulty   is  attested  by
the  fact  that  the  Court  wrote  14  separate  opinions  in  the  three
cases.     It  is  hard  enough  to  find  wholly  objective standards
in  answering  most  constitutional  questions.    That  of  obscenity
is  particularly subjective.    The  prurient  may  find  titillation  in
the  Bible,  the  unabridged  dictionary  and  the  advertising  pages
of   the  Ladies  Home  Journal,    There  is  comedy  in  the   spec-
tacle  of  nine  elderly  gentlemen   on  our  highest  court   debating
the  permissible in  smutty  literature.    That  most  Olympian  of
all  the  Justices, Oliver Wendell  Holmes,  was  fond  of  an  occa-
sional  visit  to  a  burlesque  show.   What  if  he  had  been  caught
in  an  overzealous  police  raid?
On   the  one  hand,  the  attitude  toward  sex  is  cleaner  and
freer   in  our  time.    Many  influences,  from  Walt  Whitman   to
Freud,  have  had   a  liberating  effect.     A  purer  paganism   has
replaced   the  morbid  sense  of   sin  that  comes  down  from  St.
Paul.     It  is  important  to  keep  the  avenues  open   for  serious
writing  about  so  fundamental  and   pleasurable   an   aspect   of
No  Free  Speech  for  Cassius   Clay
Cassius  Clay's  reaction  to  becoming  eligible  for  the
draft   was  characteristically   candid:  "I've  got   nothing
against   them   Viet   Congs,"  he   said.    We   suspect   he
voiced   the   sentiment   of   most   Negroes.     But   boxing
commissioners    and   promoters   and   several  veterans
groups   found   the   remark   "unpatriotic"  and  "disgust-
ing."    Clay's  title  bout,   scheduled  for  Chicago  March
29   was   called  off.    New   York,  Pittsburgh,  Louisville,
Maine,  Montreal  and  Verdun  (Can.)  also  turned  down
the  fight.  Finally,  it  was  rescheduled for  Toronto  (with
Clay  facing  a  new,  inferior  opponent).    In  the  mean-
time,  sponsors  of  the  radio  broadcast   and  most  of  the
theatres   which   had   arranged   to   carry   the   fight   on
closed  circuit  TV,  cancelled their contracts.   The Amer-
ican  Legion  announced it  would  picket  the  few  remain-
ing  theaters.   Clay  was  even  denounced  on  the  floor  of
the  House  (March  15)  by  Rep.  Frank  Clark   (D.,   Pa).
Clay  may  never  serve  in  Vietnam,  but  in  a  way  he  is
already  one  of  the  war's  casualties.  —P.O.
life  as  sex.    On  the  other  hand,  the  news  stands  display  an
appalling   flood   of   paper-back   pornography,   exploiting   all
kinds  of   psychopathic  perversities.   What  the   effect   may  be
on  immature minds no  one  really knows.   Is  it  possible  to  pre-
serve   freedom   for   serious  literature  while  doing   something
about  these  obscenities?    This was the  real  question  before  the
Court.     Its  answer  was  to  lean  over  backward   where   there
was  any  semblance  of  literary  value,  as  in  Fanny  Hill,  but  up-
holding  convictions in  the  Mishkin  and  Ginzburg  cases  where
the   evidence   showed   no   motive  other   than   pandering.
We're  not  going   into  the  wisdom  of  the  new  line  drawn
by  the  court.    But  we  are  concerned  with  the  moral  respon-
sibility  of  the  writing and  publishing  trade.    The   respectable
names  and  houses  do  plenty  of  pandering  on  their  own.    All
this  risks  a  popular  revulsion,  among  the  plain  people  of  this
country,  of  a  kind  on  which  Fascist  movements  have  fed   in
the   past.     How   maintain  respect   for   the  First  Amendment
and  the  Court  if  they  are  associated  in  the  public  mind  with
protection  of  pornography?    I  hate  to  see  their  moral  capital
squandered.     Those   who   know   better,   like  Ginzburg,   are
guilty  of  something  worse  than  pornography.    They  are guilty
of   treason   to  a  precious  heritage.
De  Mille's  Ten  Commandments  and  High  Church  Services  Can  Also  Spark  Crime
"Director  of   the   FBI,   J.  Edgar  Hoover,  has  repeatedly
emphasized  that  pornography  is   associated  with  an  over-
whelmingly   large   number   of   sex   crimes.   .   .   .   Cardinal
Spellman  particularly   stressed   the  direct   influence  obscen-
ity   has  on  immature   persons."
—Mr.  Justice  Clark  dissenting  in  the  Fanny  Hill  case
"As  I  read  the  First  Amendment, judges  cannot  gear  the
literary  diet  of  an  entire  nation  to  whatever  tepid  stuff   is
incapable  of  triggering the  most  demented mind.    The  First
Amendment  demands  more  than  a  horrible  example or  two
of   the  perpetrator of  a  crime  of  sexual  violence,  in  whose
pocket   is   found   a  pornographic  book  before  it  allows  the
Nation  to  be  saddled with  a  regime  of  censorship."*
—Mr.  Justice  Douglas  concurring  in  Fanny   Hill
* "...  it  is  impossible  to  define  'hard-core'   pornography
as  if  there  were  some  singly  lewd  concept  from  which  all
profane   ideas   passed   by   imperceptible   degrees   into  that
sexuality   called  holy.  .  .  .  Every  idea  is  capable  of  being
obscene.   .   .   .  Heinrich   Pommerenke,  who  was   a   rapist,
abuser  and  mass  slayer  of  women  in  Germany, was  prompt-
ed  to  his  series  of  ghastly  deeds  by  Cecil  B.  de  Mille's  The
Ten  Commandments.     During  the  scene  of  the  Jewish  wom-
en  dancing  about  the  Golden  Calf,  all  the  doubts  of  his  life
came  clear:  Women were  the  source  of  the  world's  troubles
and  it  was  his  mission  to  punish  them.  .  .  .  John  George
Haigh,  the   British  vampire  who  sucked  his  victim's   blood
through  soda  straws  . . . first had his ; . . vampire-longings
from  watching  the  'voluptuous'  procedure—of   an  Anglican
High  Church  Service!"
—Murphy,   The   Value   of   Pornography,    10  Wayne    Law
Review  655,  cited  by  Mr.  Justice   Douglas.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  28, 1966
The  Unspoken  Warning  from  the  Inter-American  Bank  At  The  Alliance's  Half-Way  Point
The  Lag in  Latin  Land Reform  and Food Output May Breed New  "Vietnams"
New  "Vietnams"  are  brewing  in  Latin  America  where  the
failure    to  achieve   significant    social  reform    can   bring   de-
mands   for   U.S.  intervention   to  put   down  revolutions.    The
Alliance  for  Progress  was  intended   to  avert  this  by  encour-
aging   social  reform.    But   the  Johnson  Administration,  with
the  support   of  Senators  like  Javits,  is  shifting    emphasis   to
the  encouragement   of  U.S.  and  European  private  investment.
Thin  means  skimming  off  easy  profits   at  the  expense  of  popu-
lar  welfare,   and  the  familiar   alliance   between   the  investor
and  the  backward  native  ruling  classes  supported   by  Amer-
ican  military   power.    That   way  lies  trouble.    Here  are  ex-
cerpts   from   the   fifth   annual   report   of   the  Inter-American
Development   Bank   which   shows   the   poor  agrarian  record
of   the  Alliance  for  Progress  in  its  first  5  years.  —I.F.S.
Farm  production  as  a  whole  continues  to  develop  at  an  un-
satisfactory  rate ...  an  average  annual  increase  of  only   1.6%
over  the  past  five  years  [since  the  Alliance  for  Progress  be-
gan—IPS]   as   compared   to   an   average   annual   increase  of
3.6%  during  the first  half  of  the  past  decade  .  .  .  most  of  the
increase  in  production  recorded   in  recent   years  has  been  ac-
counted  for  by commercial export  crops  such  as  sugar,  bananas
and  cotton  .  .  . per  capita  domestic  output  of  nutritionally im-
portant  products  such  as  meat,  milk  and  eggs  seem  to  have
actually  declined.  .  .  .
Little  Change   Where  Most   Needed
Low  incomes  and   oppressive  social  conditions  continue  to
prevail  in  the  countryside    As,  in  general,  very  little   change
has  taken  place  in  the  distribution of  land  and  in  social  strati-
fication, rural  incomes continue  to  be extremely maldistributed.
In  Chile,  for  example,  the  upper  1%  of  the  agricultural  fam-
ilies  receives  one-fourth  of  the  total  farm  income,  while  the
bottom  87%   of  the  farm  labor  force  received  only  one-third
of  the  total  income.  .  .  .
By   1965   most  of  the  Latin  American  countries  had   some
sort  of  agrarian reform  laws  to  permit  the  carrying out  of  sub-
stantial  reform  programs.     No   more   new  laws  were   passed
during  the  year.    Yet,  in  a  number  of  countries  considerable
legislative  activity  was  underway  to  modify   and  interpret  ex-
isting  laws.    The  major  exception  was  Chile,  where  the  new
government,  pledged  to  a  vigorous  land  reform  platform,  had
decided  to  send  a  completely  new  law  to  its  Congress  .  .  .
(which)  would-permit  a  basic  transformation  of  the   Chilean
Bertrand   Russell  on  Soviet  Jewry
In  1948 Stalin  and  his  secret  police executed  the Jew-
ish  creative  intelligentsia  and  totally  destroyed  Jewish
institutions,  publishing  houses,  schools  and theatres and
every  vestige   of  national  existence   outside  the  syna-
gogues.     Destalinization   has   brought   little  improve-
ment.   Jews  still  have  no  schools,  no  national  theatres
and  no  secular  communal  institutions.   Although  resti-
tution  was  frequently  promised  in  1956  and  1957,  only
token  symbols  of  culture  have  been  permitted—a  hand-
ful  of  books  in  the  Yiddish  language  published  in  small
editions    and    exploited    as    reassuring     propaganda
abroad;   one   monthly  Yiddish  magazine;  one   or   two
amateur  dramatic  groups.  .  .  .  Discrimination  against
Jews  in  the  USSR,  like  the  persecution  of  dissident  in-
tellectuals,   seriously   impairs  the   development   of   the
Soviet  Union  as  a  true  Socialist   society.
—Message   from   Lord  Russell  read  at  a  hearing   in
New   York   March   19  on  the  status  of  Soviet   Jewry.
agrarian  structure.   .  .  .  Water   resources   would  be   national-
ized  and  use  of  water   (for  irrigation)   would   henceforth   be
strictly  controlled  in  the public  interest.  .  . .
Unfortunately    in  too  many  countries  the  national  institu-
tions   concerned   with   agrarian   reform   remain   largely   con-
cerned  with  political,   legal  and  administrative  matters,   while
the  technical  work  is  being  carried  on  by  traditional  agencies
not  geared  to  deal  with  problems   of  poor   farmers. ...  In
addition,  with  few  exceptions   such  as  Venezuela,  the  budgets
of  land  reform   agencies   are  still   inadequate   even   for  mini-
mum  programs.   .  .  .
There  has  been  very  little  actual  land  redistribution   during
the  last  four  years.    Almost  no  change  has  occurred   in   the
pattern  of  concentration  of  land  ownership   .  .  .  three   coun-
tries  that  have  made  the  most  progress  are  those  whose  agrar-
ian  reform  efforts  extends  over  a  longer  period  of  time   [and,
the  Bank   fails  to  add,   two  have  had  revolutionary   land   re-
forms].    Thus  the  reform  programs   of  Mexico,   Bolivia  and
Venezuela,  have  all  entered  into  a  phase  of  consolidation.  .  . .
In   the   rest  of   the  countries,   where   the   need   for   structural
change  is greatest,  land  redistribution  is  still  a  marginal  rather
than  a  central  feature of  agrarian  policies.
What  the  U.S.  Could  Do  About  Apartheid  in  South  Africa  If  It  Wanted  To
The  U.S.  has  a  divided  mind  in  its   policy  toward  South
Africa.    On  the  one  hand  eloquent condemnatory statements
are  made  about  apartheid.    On  the  other  hand  it  is  pointed
out  that  South  African  ports  are  highly  useful  to  the  U.S.
Navy,   that   the   tracking  station   facilities  are  important,
that  American  business  provides  a  useful  channel  of  com-
munication  with  South African  circles.
It  is  not  true  to  maintain  that  the  U.S.  can't  do anything
about  apartheid.    Rather,  the  will  to  do  something  effective
is  lacking.    If  a  battle  comes  in  South  Africa,  which  side
will  the  U.S.  be  on?    With  the  independence  of  Bechuana-
land,   Angola,   Mozambique,    Rhodesia,   attacks    may   well
come   from   the  borders  as  well  as  inside.    Will   the   U.S.
take  the  view  that  South  Africa  is  a  bulwark  against Com-
munism   in  Africa?     That  the  rebels  in  South  Africa   are
under  Communist  domination?
The  U.S.  can  make  clear  an  anti-apartheid  policy  by mov-
ing  rapidly  toward  disengagement,  where  there  is   greatest
involvement:  in  the  economic  sphere.     U.S.   oil  companies
have  almost  50%  of  South  African  refining  capacity;  U.S.
motor  companies   produce  almost  60%  of  all  vehicles;   U.S.
rubber  companies dominate production with  Dunlop,  a  Brit-
ish  company; an  American  controls  15%  of   South  African
gold.
To  implement  a  policy  of  disengagement  we  suggest:  1st,
let   the   government  call   leading  businessmen   involved  in
South  African  trade  and  investment  together  and  ask  com-
pliance  with  a  government  policy  of  disengagement.     Some
would  comply, some  would  not,  but  at  least  a  policy  would
be  set.    Second,  the  bulk  of   U.S.  exports  to  South  Africa
would   be   placed   under  the   Export   Control   Act.    Third,
legislation  would  be  passed   forbidding   U.S.   firms   abroad
to  practice  racial discrimination.
—George   Houser,   executive   director   of   the   U.S.  Com-
mittee   on  Africa,    and   editor   of   Africa   Today,   abridged
from   testimony   March   15   before    a  House   subcommittee.
5    ,
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  28,1966
What  We  Fear  More  Than  Communism  in  South  Vietnam
(Continued  fmm   Page   One)
cials  believe that  his  [Thi's]  ouster  is  "a  step  toward political
stability."    There  was speculation,  Mohr  wrote,  that Thi's dis-
missal   might   set   off  political  agitation   but   "well-informed
sources  discounted  these  possibilities"  saying  that   "Marshal
Ky  and  the  other  officers  had  made careful  soundings and  had
concluded   that  General   Thi's   political  strength  was  greatly
overrated."     It  seems  that  now,  as  in  the  days  of  Diem,  our
intelligence   men   and   South   Vietnam's   smoke   each   other's
marijuana  in  blissful   confraternity.
So  Soon  After   Honolulu
Sometimes  one  wonders  what  strabismic  sights  our  sleuths
see  when  they  look   down   from   their  air-conditioned  flying
saucers  on  South  Vietnam.    "According  to  informed  sources,"
said  the  New   York  Times  Sunday Review of  the  News  March
20,  after  nine  days of  dangerous  political turmoil  in  the  wake
of   Thi's   ouster,   "the   American  mission  in  South   Vietnam,
though  it  did  not  instigate  Marshal  Ky's  action,  approved  of
it  wholeheartedly as a  step  against  'warlordism'."  It  turned  put
that  of  all  the  warlords  on  the  Military  Council,  which  has
been  ruling  South  Vietnam  with  the  playboy  Air  Marshal  Ky
as  its figurehead, the one  least  a  warlord  was Thi,  the  only one
who  had  risked  his  life  in  an  effort  to  overthrow  the  despotic
Diem  regime,  the  only  one  who  was  popular  in  the  military
zone  he  ruled,  the  only  one  who  had  allowed  students  and
Buddhists  some  measure  of   political  freedom.     Significantly
the  charges  against  General  Thi  have  never  been  made  public.
It  was  said,  according  to  the  Mohr  dispatch  just  quoted,  that
he  refused  to  execute  "Government   orders  on  subjects  rang-
ing  from  refugee  administration to  rural  pacification."    Since
the  Ky  regime's  record  on  both  has  been  notoriously  bad,  it
would  be  interesting to know Thi's  side  of  the  story.    It  looks
as  if,  only  a  few  short  weeks  after  all  those  glamorous  prom-
ises  at  Honolulu, we  connived  in  the  removal of  the  only  Gen-
eral  with  some  understanding  of  popular  aspiration.
Now  the  President  is  sending  an  ex-CIA  man,  Robert  W.
Komer   (Baltimore  Sun,  March  23)   who  was  on  McGeorge
Bundy's  staff,   to  push  our   reconstruction  program   in   South
Vietnam.     For   all  we  know  Komer   may  be  a  democrat  of
deepest  die,  but  we're  keeping our  fingers  crossed  because  the
Like  The  Kaiser's  Germany
Our  national   vocabulary   has  changed  with  our   poli-
cies.    A   few  years  ago—even   some   months  ago—we
were   talking   of  detente  and  building   bridges,  of   five
year  plans  in  India   and  Pakistan,  of   agricultural   co-
operatives  in  the  Dominican  Republic  and  land  and  tax
reform   all  over   Latin  America.    Today  these  subjects
have  an  antique  ring.   Instead  of  emphasizing  plans  for
social  change,  the   policy   planners  and  political   scien-
tists  are  conjuring  up  "scenarios" of  escalation  and nu-
clear   confrontation   and   "models"  of   insurgency   and
counterinsurgency;  in   Latin   America  they  seem   more
interested   in  testing   the   'images'  of   armies   than  in
the  progress  of  social  reform.    Commenting  last  Octo-
ber  on  the  reaction  to  those  who  opposed  the  war  in
Vietnam,   a   European  observer  wrote:  "The  airy   eon-
tempt   with  which   many   of   the  unofficial  defenders  of
official  policy  nowadays  treat  such  'sentimental'  consid-
erations  as  international  law,  neutral  opinion,  or  even
the  wishes  of   the   unfortunate   people  of   Vietnam,   is
indeed  something  new  in  responsible  American  circles;
to   one   European   who  has  just   spent   a   year   in  the
United  States,  it  sounded  ominously  similar  to  the  no-
torious 'Realpolitik' of  Imperial  Germany,  while  the  pro-
testors  seem  to  embody  the  American  democratic   tra-
dition."
—Sen. Fulbright  at  the  Univ. of  Conn., March  22
Cl A  in  the  past  has  not  proven  the  best   school  for   under-
standing  popular  aspiration.    Robert  Guillain  in  four  brilliant
articles  written   for  Le   Monde   (March   12-17),   before   the
popular   outburst   provoked   by  Thi's  dismissal,  has   summed
up  the  situation  as a  "gangrene"  which  is eating  away all  sem-
blance   of   popular   and   national   support   and   leaving   this,
nakedly,  a  war  to  impose  our  will.    Elected  institutions  have
been  the  principal  demand  of  the  pro-Thi  rallies.    Even  the
Catholic  minority on  which our  policy  has  relied  since the days
of   Diem   is   now   split   and   growing   hostile.     Though   our
agencies   look   with   suspicious  eye  on   the   Buddhists,   their
theme  is  nothing  more  subversive  than  "legal  institutions,  in-
cluding   an   elected   parliament."   (Walter   Friedenberg   from
Saigon,  Wash.  Dally  News  March  20.)     Or  is  that  the  most
subversive  demand  of  all?    Sometimes  it  looks  as  if  we  fear
even  more  than  Communism  that  dangerous   unsettling   idea
"d   ————  y."
Index  for   1965    Ready  —   Send  Stamped   Addressed   Envelope  —   Renew  Your  Sub and  Send  A  Gift  Sub at  the  Same  Time
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly       5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
3/28/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)    Name    ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
LR Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December  and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W..    Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.   F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:      S6   in   Canada:   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mall   rates:
$15  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,   Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED