I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jan17.pdf

============================================================

The  Message  That  Trio Brought Back  From Hanoi,  Pps. 2-3
How  Do  You  Keep  A  Strong  Foothold  in  A  Quicksand?
"You    don't  take   a  firm  stand  in  quicksand," he   [City
Councilman  Theodore  R.  Kupferman,   Republican  candidate
for   Mayor   Lindsay's  vacant  seat   in  Congress]   said,  "The
only  question  I  see  is,  How  do  we  terminate  our  involve-
ment   there  as  soon  as  possible."     Mr.  Orin   Lehman,   the
Democratic  candidate, said  he  believed the  U.S.  should  push
for  negotiations  to  end the  war  but  at  the  same  time  should
keep  a  strong  foothold  in  the  embattled  Southeast   Asian
country.    "We just  can't  pull  out  of  there,"  he  said.    "But
we  also  don't  want  to  go  all-out  and  bomb  Hanoi." His  posi-
tion  was  close  to  that  of  the  Democratic Administration.
—New  York  Times,  Jan.  7.    This  special  election  Feb.  8
offers    a  referendum   on  peace.    We  strongly   urge   support
for   the  Republican   candidate.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO. 2
JANUARY  17,  1966
'<»       WASHINGTON,  D.   C.16  CENTS
Lyndon  Johnson's  Bay  of  Pigs
A  week  before  the  President's  State  of  the  Union  message
a  White  House   dispatch  on  the  Associated   Press  ticker  few
papers  used  (CR  4-.15P  1/6)    said   "successive   State   Depart-
ment  drafts  of  proposed  language  for  a  major  Johnson  state-
ment  on  Vietnam"  had  been   rejected  and  Johnson   with  the
aid  of  his  staff  was  coming  up  with  his  own  language.     The
State  of  the  Union  message  made  this  easy  to  believe.    Un-
like  the  Johns  Hopkins   speech,   which   attacked  China  and
blamed  it  (in  the  State  Department's  familiar  litany)  for  ag-
gression   in  Tibet,  India  and  Korea   as  well  as  Vietnam,   the
State  of  the  Union  message  made  only  one  passing  reference
to  Peking,   "In  recent  months  a  number  of  nations  have  cast
out  those  who  would  subject  them  to  the  ambitions  of  main-
land  China."   The  milder tone  may  reflect  the  warning  in  the
Mansfield  report  that  "the   tacit  consent  of  China"  might  be
necessary   for   a  settlement   with   Hanoi.    The   message   also
eschewed  another   favorite  State  Department   theme.    Unlike
the  President's   formal  press  conference  statement  of  last  July
28,  it  did  not  compare  peace  in  Vietnam  to  Munich.  Last  time
there  was a Soviet  emissary in Hanoi, trying to  negotiate  peace,
we  bombed  the  North.   This  time  a  State  of  the  Union  mes-
sage  calls  for  expanded   trade  with  Eastern  Europe  and   the
Soviet  Union,  and  asks  Congress  for  authority  to  remove  the
special  tariff  barriers  which  restrict  East-West  trade.    As  if  in
further   consideration   for   Soviet   susceptibilities,   the   message
did  not  mention  NATO,  much  less  German  hopes  of  nuclear
sharing,  but  spoke  instead  vaguely  of  "the  community  of  the
Atlantic"  and  of  "the  unity  of  Europe."
They're Negotiating Already
This  was  a  State  of  the  Union   message  which  did  its  best
to  avoid  the  rasping  and  the  inflammatory.   It  lent  credibility
to  the  speculation  in  that  same  AP  dispatch  of  differences  with
State.    "Some  Johnson  aides,"  it  said,  "if  not  the  President,
apparently  feel  Rusk  has  taken  too  skeptical  a  stance  toward
peace  moves."    Neither   in  its  rhetoric  nor  its  recommenda-
tions  was  this  a  warlike  speech.    It  was  an  exercise  in  emo-
tional   de-escalation.     Its  emphasis  was  on   domestic   reform.
The public  exchange  now going on  between  Hanoi  and  Wash-
ington  may  be  read  as  the  beginning  of  a  negotiation,  and  as
in  any  other  bargaining   session  the  terms  are  being  whittled
Sudden  Death  and  Precarious Peace
It  was  said  18  months  ago  when  Nehru  died  that  if
he  had  lived,  he  and  his  friend,  Sheikh  Abdullah,   the
saintly  and  long  persecuted  (by  India)  leader  of  Kash-
mir  might  have  worked  out  a  peaceful  settlement  with
Pakistan.    We  can  only  hope  that  18  months  hence  it
will  not  be  said  that  if  Shastri  had  lived,  the  Tashkent
declaration  might have led  to  final  solution of  the  Kash-
mir  problem  which  inflames  the  minds  and  wastes   the
energies  of  the  kindred  peoples  of  India  and  Pakistan.
The  outlook  is  not  promising.   The  Tashkent declara-
tion  was  itself   a  last-minute  miracle.    Though  it  did
not  touch on  the  Kashmir  issue  directly,  it  provided  for
a  pullback  of  armed  forces,  it  created  a  better  atmos-
phere  between  the  two  countries  and  it   reestablished
confidence   between  Ayub  and  Shastri.    Whether   this
confidence   can  be  maintained  with  his  successor   is  a
question.    Moscow  deserves  applause  for  this  triumph
in  the  search  for  peace,  and  we  can  only  hope  this  will
whet  its  appetite  for  a  similar   thaw  in  the  relations
between  Washington  and  Hanoi.
down.    The  Johns  Hopkins  speech  spoke  only  of  negotiations
with  "governments  concerned."   Now  the  President  says  "We
will  meet  at  any Conference  table  .  .  .  and  consider  the  views
of  any groups."    This  change  seems  a  step  closer  to  recogni-
tion  that  the  National  Liberation  Front  must  be  a party  to any
negotiation.    The  passage  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  speech  which
most  alarmed  Hanoi  and  the  NLF  demanded  "an  independent
South  Vietnam—securely  guaranteed  and  able  to  shape  its own
relationships  to  all  others."    Now,  after  declaring  for  "a  free
decision  on  the  great  question  of  reunification,"  the  President
says  "We  will  withdraw  our  soldiers  once  South  Vietnam  is
securely  guaranteed  the  right  to  shape  its  own  future."    This
narrows  the  distance  between  the  U.S.  and  NLF  positions,  as
may  be  seen  from  the  views  (on  pps.  2-3)  brought  back  from
Hanoi  by  Staughton   Lynd,  Tom  Hayden  and  Herbert   Apth-
eker.    There  is  also  the  offer,  "We  will  work  for  a  cease-fire
now  or  once  discussions  have  begun."
This  offer  to  end  the  shooting  may  usefully  be  read  in  the
light   of   the   Mansfield   report   which   says   that   negotiations
accompanied  by  a  cease-fire  "would  serve  to  stabilize  a  situa-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  17,1966
"If  You  See President  Johnson," Premier  Pham  Van  Dong  Said  in  Hanoi ...
Instead  of  prosecuting  Prof,  Staughton Lynd,  Tom  Hay den
and  Dr.  Herbert  Aptheker  for  their  trip  to  Hanoi,  the   gov-
ernment  ought  to  pay  their  expenses,  a  small  fraction  of  the
money   spent   by   C1A   to   find   out  what   Hanoi   is  thinking.
Their  findings   are  probably   a  good  deal  more  reliable.  Here
are  high-lights  from   the  statements  they   made  on  returning
to  New   York   Jan.   9.    The   full   text   of   the    Lynd-Hayden
statement  will  be  in  the  January   issue  of  Viet  Report,  133
W.  72d  St.,   New   York  City  10023  (50c)   and  the  text  of  Dr.
Aptheker's  in  the  Jan.    If!   Sunday   Worker,  23  W.  26th   St.,
NYC   10010  (15c).    Dr.  Aptheker  did  not  disagree   with  the
Lynd-Hayden  statement  but  filed  one  of  his  own.    As  a  lead-
ing  American Communist  theoretician, he  had  access  to  party
circles  in  Hanoi.    This  gives  special   interest  to  his  report.
By  Prof.  Staughton  Lynd  and  Tom  Hayden
We  think  that  as  seen   from   Hanoi  there  is  a  deep  incon-
sistency   in   U.S.   policy  between  a  peaceful   posture   looking
toward  a  negotiated  settlement,  and  an  interventionist  posture
which  has  in  view  the  permanent  partition  of  Vietnam   and
an  expanded  war.  .  .  .  American  Ambassadors  have  gone  all
over  the  world  to  "knock  on  any  door"  seeking  peace.     But
Premier  Pham  Van  Dong,  in  response  to  our  questions,  stated
unequivocally  that  the  U.S.  government  had  not  made  contact
with  the  government  of  the  DRV  [North  Vietnam],   either
at   Hanoi   or   through   DRV   Ambassadors   in   other   capitals,
since  President  Johnson  spoke  of  knocking  on  any  door   Dec.
20.   We  assume  that  the  U.S.  in  keeping with  previous  policy,
has   not   sought   to   make   contact   with  NLF    representatives
either.    To  those  with  whom  we  spoke  in  Vietnam,  it  appears
that  the  U.S.  knocks  on  all  doors  except  the  doors  of  those
whom  it  is   fighting.   They  wonder  if  the  U.S.   is  searching
for   peace   or  mainly  attempting   to   soften   its   image   before
negative  public  opinion  abroad  and  at  home. ...
The  North  Vietnamese  do  not  trust  an  offer   to  negotiate
unconditionally  which,  as  they  see  it,  represents  only  one  side
of   America's  two-sided  policy.    They  want  to  know   if   the
United   States   has   clearly   decided   that   Vietnam   should   be
united  rather  than  partitioned.    They  want  to  make  sure  that
the   U.S.  has  abandoned  any  plan  to  make  South  Vietnam  a
military  base  for  the  U.S.  in  Southeast  Asia.  Thus  "Observer"
stated  in Nhan  Dan  for  Jan.  3 that  the  so-called unconditional
negotiations  offered   by  the  U.S.   in  fact  contains  four  condi-
tions:   1.  U.S.  troops  will  stay  in  South  Vietnam  as  long  as
the   U.S.  thinks  it  necessary;  2.  South  Vietnam  must  be  an
independent,  sovereign  state;  3.  The  U.S.  refuses  to  recognize
the  NLF   [National   Liberation  Front];  4.  "The   North  Viet-
namese  people   are  not   allowed   to  support   [the   words  are
Young  Americans   For  Frenzy
There   is  a  certain  limited  pleasure   in  the  fact   that
the   Young   Americans   for   Freedom   felt   compelled   to
search  out  two  Negroes  to  sit  on  the  platform  at  their
pro-war  rally  in  the  DAR's  Constitution  Hall  last  week.
One  of  the  two,  a  bemedalled  Eagle  Scout,  led  the  audi-
ence  in  the  Pledge  of  Allegiance.    The  rally,  billed  as
the  climax  of  a  two-month  "International   Crusade  For
Freedom  in  Vietnam,"  was  by  its  own  standards,  a flop.
A  memo  sent  to  all  YAF  chapters  in  December   urged
"that   every   one  of   Constitution   Hall's   3811  seats  be
filled .  . .  this  must  be our priority job in  the  few  weeks
remaining."    One  local   paper   estimated   the  crowd  at
2500,  another  at  2000.    There  was  a  lynch  mob  tone  to
some  of  the  speeches.    "The  International  Days  of  Pro-
test," said  Tom  Houston,  national  YAF  chairman,  "was
an  occasion  for  all  sorts  of  varmints to  come  out  of  the
woodwork   .   .   .   lousy    scoundrels    come   out   of   the
ground."    That  moment  of  the  evening  intended  to  be
most  unnerving  was   provided  by  Rep.  Bill   Brock   (R-
Tenn.).    He  climaxed  his  speech  with  a  purported  quote
from  a  wounded  Marine  who  said  of  the  peace   move-
ment,  "just  keep  them  in  one  piece,  cause  I'm  going  to
he  back  in  a  few  months  and  I  want  a  few."  —P.O.
those   of   "Observer"]   "the   patriotic  struggle  of   their  com-
patriots  to  the  South."  .  .  .
Thus  the  negative  responses  of  the  DRV  to  the  bombing
pause  appears  to  stem,  first,  from  observation  of  warlike  acts
in  South  Vietnam which  have  accompanied the  pause,  and  sec-
ond  from  uncertainty as  to  whether  the  U.S.  has  really  given
up   its  plans   for  an  indefinite  occupation  of   South  Vietnam
and  decided  to  return  to  the  Geneva  agreements.     President
Johnson's  14-point  program  appears  to  come  close  to  the  dip-
lomatic  statements  of  the  NLF  and  DRV,  especially in  accept-
ing  the  Geneva  agreements  as a  basis  of  settlement,  in  denying
any  desire  to  keep  troops   indefinitely  in  South  Vietnam,  and
in  approving  reunification.
However,  the  North  Vietnamese  see  two  crucial  inadequa-
cies  in  the  new  U.S.  peace  position.    First,  they  wonder  how
the  U.S.  can  accept  the  Geneva  agreements   as  the  basis   for
settlement  but  treat  the  Four  Points  merely  as  a  matter  which
could  be  discussed.     Hanoi   considers  its  Four   Points   to  be
the  essence of  the  Geneva  settlement,  especially the  provisions
requiring  withdrawal  of  all  foreign  troops  from  Vietnam  and
leaving  all  political  questions  to  the  self-determination of  the
Vietnamese  people.
Secondly,  the  U.S.  realizes  that  the  NLF  must  be  in  some
How  We  Help  the  Good  People  of
"As  the  battle  rages,  we  will  continue  as  best  we  can  to
help  the  good  people  of  South  Vietnam  enrich  the  condition
of  their   life."
—Lyndon  Johnson
Saigon   (AP)—To  break  the  back  of  the  Viet  Cong,   U.S.
and   allied   forces   are   adopting   a   program   of    destroying
houses  and  crops  in  areas  which  feed  and  shield,  the  Com-
munist  forces.    For  years,  Americans  refused  to  participate
in  "scorched  earth"  efforts,  leaving  them  to  the  Vietnamese.
Now  Americans  are  directly  involved.    They  are  trying   to
protect  innocent  people. . . .
The  rich,  intensely  cultivated flat  lands  south  of  the  Vaico
Oriental  River  west  of  Saigon  are  "prime  scorched   earth"
South  Vietnam Enrich  Their Lives
targets.    U.S.  paratroopers   from  the  173rd  Airborne  began
operating  there  last  week-end.  .  .  .  The  paratroopers'   mis-
sion  was  to  round  up  all  the  people  they  could  find,  evacu-
ate  them  north  of  the  river  to  resettlement  camps,  and  burn
and  destroy   everything  eatable   and  liveable.  .  .  .
Every  house  they  encountered  was  burned  to  the  ground.
.  .  .  Every  cooking  utensil  was  smashed,  every  banana   tree
severed,  every  mattress  slashed.    On the  first  day,  the  men
of  C  Company  found  more  than  60  Vietnamese  women  and
children  weeping  as  they  lay  in  trenches  around  their  devas-
tated   homes.
—This  Associated  Press  dispatch   appeared   in  the   early
editions  of  the  Washington  Star,  Jan.   6.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   17,1966
... "Please  Ask  Him  For  Me,  Why   Is  He  Fighting  Us?"  U.S. Trio  Relate
sense  a  party  to  any  final  negotiation,  but  the  U.S. defines  the
NLF  simply  as  an  arm  of  Hanoi.    Premier  Van  Dong  told  us
that  his  government  "can by  no  means  be  disassociated"  from
the  third  point   in  its  Four   Point   program,   which  calls  for
settling  the  affairs  of  South  Vietnam  in  accordance  with  the
program  of  the  NLF.   The  Premier  said  that  what  this  point
involved  was  the  principle  of  self-determination at  the  heart
of  the  Geneva  agreements.    Like many  others  with  whom  we
spoke,  the  Premier   insisted  on  the  independence  of  the  NLF
from  Hanoi.    At  one  point  in  our  talk  he  indicated  his  own
surprise  at  the  apparent  strength  of  the  NLF   and  its  success
in   dealing  with  the  U.S.  forces.   .  .  .  Our   conversations  in
Vietnam  convinced  us  that  many  ingredients  of  an  honorable
solution  exist.  .  .  .  Every  indication  is  that  there  is  no  explicit
requirement   of   the   physical   withdrawal   of   all  U.S.  troops
prior  to  negotiations.  .  .  .  The  Premier  categorically  denied
the  presence  of   "forces   of   the  Democratic  Republic  of  Viet-
nam  in  South  Vietnam,"  terming  it  a  fabrication.
At  one  point  in  our  interview  with  Premier Van  Dong,  he
said  to  us:  If  you  have  the  opportunity to  see  President  John-
son,  please  ask  him  for  me,  why  is he  fighting  us?    We  won-
der  if  the  American  people   are  sure  of  the  answer.    Before
we  launch  a  new  and  more  terrible  round  of  escalation,  should
we  not   stop  to   consider   whether   the   possibilities  of   peace
have  really  been  exhausted?  .  . .
By  Dr. Herbert Aptheker
.  .  .  Since  Geneva  and  since  1956, the  DP..V  has  tried  re-
peatedly,   though   without   success,   to  normalize  relations  be-
tween  South  and  North  Vietnam.    Furthermore,   in  three  im-
portant  respects—as  was  emphasized  to  me  during  this  trip—
agreements   already  have  been   offered  going  further   than   the
South  African  Mercenaries  for   Vietnam?
Johannesburg,  Jan. 5  (AFP)—More  than  70  former
South  African  mercenaries  from  the  Congo  have  signed
contracts   as  jungle  "combat  experts"  with  the  Ameri-
can  forces  in  Vietnam,  the  Sunday  Times  of   Johannes-
burg  announces.   The  news  was  immediately  denied  by
a  spokesman  of  the  U.S.  Embassy   in  Pretoria  who  de-
clared:  "Any  document  these  men  could  have  in  their
possession  to  support   their  words  can  only  be  false."
The  paper,   however,  quotes   a  certain   Jan  Van  Wijk,
former  lieutenant  of  mercenaries  in  the  Congo,  as say-
ing  that  he  and  his  comrades  were  solicited   by  officials
of   the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Leopoldville.    The  latter   are
said  to  have  declared  that  their  experience  in  the  Congo
would  be  valuable  in  the  struggle  against  the  Commu-
nists  in  South  Vietnam.   Van  Wijk  added  that  the  first
group  of  mercenaries   had  already  departed  for   Europe
and   that   reservations    had   been   made   for   a   second
group.                                    —Le  Monde  (Paris)  Jan. 6
Geneva  accord.    Thus  the  DRV—and  since  I960  the  NLF—
have  agreed   to:
(a)   the   neutrality  in   foreign   policy   of   the   South   Viet-
namese  interim  government.
(b)   the  coalition  character  of  such  a  government,  and
(c)   a  prolonged  process  for  the  reunification  of  North  and
South,  determined   without  outside  interference  and   confirmed
by  a  general  and  free   election.
None  of  these  three  points  was  in  the  Geneva  agreement.
All—and  this  was  emphasized   during  my  visit  to  the  DRV—
illustrate  the  moderation   of   the  DRV   approach.     Certainly
their   existence—undoubtedly   unknown   to  the   vast  majority
of  the  American  people—refutes  the  Washington   stereotype
of  the  DRV  as  inflexible  and  stubborn,  not  to  say  war-seeking.
What  SNCC  Said  About  The War  and  Why  Negroes Feel The Way  They Do
Before   condemning  SNCC   for  its  opposition   to  the war,
every  white  American  ought   to  ask  himself:   If   we  were  a
minority   in  a  black  Republic,   if   we  and  our  friends   were
murdered   with  impunity,  if   we  were   underpaid   and   over-
worked  by  Negroes,  if  we  were  the  last  to  be  hired  but  the
first   to  be  drafted,    how  would  we  feel   if   we  were  sent   to
fight  another  white  people  on  some  distant  Continent?
Do  not   be  deceived   because  the  NAACP   has   "disassoci-
ated"  itself   from   tfy   SNCC  statement.    We  susjkct   SNCC
says  what  99%  or  V.S.  Negroes   feel.     Two  new  murders
in  the  South,  of  Vernon  Dahmer  in  Hattiesburg,  Miss.,  and
of   Samuel  Younge,  Jr., in  Tuskeegee   punctuate  the  bitter-
ness.    The  denial   of  a  seat   in   the  Georgia   legislature- to
Julian  Bond  for  opposing  the  war  does  to  a  Negro   legislator
what  no  one  would  dare  do  to  a  white  man.   Against  this
background,  SNCC's   words  need  to  be  gravely    considered.
This  is  in  part  what  its  statement  on  th<;  war  said:
"We believe the  U.S. government has  been  deceptive in  its
claims  of  concern  for  the  freedom of  the  Vietnamese  people,
just  as  the  government  has  been  deceptive  in  claiming  con-
cern   for   colored   people   in   such   other   countries   as   the
Dominican  Republic,  the  Congo,  South  Africa,  Khodcsia  and
in  the  United  States  itself.  .  .  .
"We  ourselves  have  often   been  victims  of   violence  and
confinement   executed  by  U.S.  governmental  officials.     We
recall  the  numerous persons  who  have  been  murdered in  the
South  because  of  their  efforts  to  assure  their  civil  and  hu-
man   rights,   and   whose   murderers  have  been   allowed   to
escape  penalty  for  their  crimes.
"The  murder  of  Samuel  Younge, Jr., in  Tuskeegee, Ala-
bama,  is  no  different  from  the  murder  of  peasants  in  Viet-
nam,  for  both  Younge  and  the  Vietnamese  sought,   and  are
still  seeking,  to  secure  the  rights  guaranteed   them  by law.
.  .  .  Samuel  Younge  was  murdered  because  U.S. law  is  not
being  enforced.    Vietnamese  are  murdered  because  the U.S.
is  pursuing  an  aggressive  policy  in  violation of  international
law.  .  .  .
"We know that  for  the  most  part  elections  in  this  country,
in  the  North  as  well  as  the  South,  are  not  free.    We  have
seen  that  the  1965 Voting  Rights  Act  and  the  1964 Civil
Rights  Act  have  not  yet  been  implemented with  full  Federal
power   and  sincerity.     We  question,   then,   the   ability  and
even  the  desire  of  the  U.S. government  to' guarantee   free
elections  abroad.     We  maintain  that   our  country's  cry  of
"preserve  freedom  in  the  world"  is  a  hypocritical  mask  be-
hind  which  it  squashes  liberation  movements  which  are  not
bound,  and  refuse  to  be  bound,  by  the  expediencies   of U.S.
cold  war policies.  .  .  .
"We  take  note  of  the  fact  that  16%  of  the  draftees  from
this  country  are  Negroes  called  on  to  stifle  the  liberation
of  Vietnam, to  preserve  a  'Democracy'  which  does  not  exist
for  them at  home.    We ask, where  is  the  draft  for  the  free-
dom  fight  in  the  United  States?    We  therefore   encourage
those  Americans  who  prefer  to  use  their  energy   in  build-
ing  democratic  forms  within  this  country.   We  believe  that
work  in  the  civil  rights   movement  and  with  other  human
relations  organizations  is  a  valid  alternative  to  the  draft.
We  urge  all  Americans   to  seek   this  alternative,  knowing
full   well  that   it   may  cost   them  their  lives—as  painfully
as  in  Vietnam."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   17,1966
The  Mansfield  Report:  A  Record  of  Military  and  Political  Failure
(Continued    from   Page  One)
tjon   in  which  the  majority   of   the  population  remains  under
nominal  government  control  but  in  which  dominance  of   the
countryside  rests  largely  in  the  hands  of  the  Vietcong."    The
report  says  there  is  no  certainty as  to  what  might  emerge  from
such  negotiations  but  that  the  only  "visible  alternative"  is "the
indefinite  expansion  and  intensification of  the  war," with  "no
grounds  for  optimism"   that  it  could   be  ended   soon   or con-
fined  to  South   Vietnam.
The  Monsoon and Other Moonshines
We  believe  the  key  to  the  situation  is  that  Vietnam  is Lyn-
don  Johnson's  Bay of  Pigs.    Just  as  that  debacle  opened Ken-
nedy's  eyes  to  the  poor  advice  he  had  been  getting  from  our
military  and  intelligence  establishment,  so has  the  course of  the
war  in  Vietnam  opened   Johnson's  since  he  agreed   last  Febru-
ary  to  the  bombing  of  the  North.   This  is what  the  Mansfield
report  in  its  quiet  but  grim   understatements   spelled  out  for
Johnson.    All  the  talk  of  the  military  experts  about  the mon-
soon   turned   out   to   be  so  much   moonshine;,  despite   better
weather  and  heavier bombardment,  enemy  attacks  rose  steadily
through  the  year;  an  indication  of  the  tempo  is  that  35%  of
all  American  casualties in  Vietnam  since  1961 occurred  in  the
one  month  of  November,   1965.    For  all  the  talk  of   better
South  Vietnamese  morale   "a  high   desertion   rate   continues."
Heavy  air  attack  in  the  South  has  not  changed  the  situation  on
the  ground:  "What  was  controlled  then  by  the  Vietcong  [i.e.
in  early  1965]  is  still  controlled  by  the  Vietcong."     Shall  we
bomb  "the Ho  Chi Minh  trail"  more  heavily?    "These  roads,"
says  the  Mansfield  report,  "are not  easily  susceptible  to  aerial
interdiction."    Shall  we  look  for  aid  from  the  non-Communist
powers  of  Asia?    "Each,"  says  the  report,  "has as  a  principal
concern   the  avoidance  of   direct  involvement."     Internal   re-
form  in  South  Vietnam?   Three  years  ago  Mansfield  reported
to  Kennedy  that  the  Diem  regime  was  "only  at  the  beginning
of  a  beginning  in  coping  with  its grave  inner problems."-Now
he  and  his  four  Senatorial  colleagues   report   to  Johnson   that
Saigon  is  still  "at  the  beginning  of   a  beginning   in  dealing
with  the  problems  of  popular  mobilization."
He  Just  Wasn't  As  Fortunate  As  Lyndon
We  are  glad  to  hear  that  two  British   psychiatrists
have  decided  that  George  III  was  not  insane  after all.
One  of  the  popular  reasons  for  suspecting  madness  is
that  he  seemed  to  regard  the  American  Revolution  as
at  bottom  merely  a  French  plot.    This  is  not  as fan-
tastic   as  it   may  seem.    We  now  know,  what  George
Ill's  secret  service  may  well  have  reported  to  him  at
the   time,   that   90%   of   the   gunpowder  used   by   the
colonial  rebels  in  the  first  two  and  a  half  years  of  the
war   came  from  secret   European   sources,   most   of   it
through  a  fictitious  private  concern  organized  by  that
notorious  agitator,  Beaumarchais,  to  ship  military sup-
plies  to  America.    (Bailey's  Diplomatic  History  of  the
American  People,  citing  Stephenson's  "Supply  of  Gun-
powder  in  1776"  in  American  Historical  Review,  1925).
The  French  monarchy had  decided  that  the  easiest  way
to  revenge  itself   for  the  loss  of  Canada  was  "by  en-
couraging   the   American  rebels"   with   munitions  and
money   (Bailey,   p.  12).   It  wasn't  lack  of   lucidity,  it
was  lack  of   technology,  that  afflicted   George   HI.    If
only   he   had   had   bombing   planes—and   advisers   like
McNamara   and   Rusk—he   could  have  bombed   Paris,
forced  an  end  of  French aid, hung  George  Washington
and  we  Americans  would  have  lived  happily  ever  after
in  loyal  fealty  to  the   British   Crown.
The  most  important  aspect  of  the  report  is  its  disclosure  of
the  true  situation  in  Saigon.    "Much  of  Saigon's   indigenous
food   and   commodity  supply,"  Mansfield   and   his   colleagues
point  out, "depends  on  the  sufferance  of  the  Vietcong  and  on
payments  to  them."    They  can  blockade  and  starve  it  out.   In
addition  "Saigon  with  its  many vulnerabilities to  sabotage  and
terrorism"   is  hostage  for  Hanoi.    U.S. military  briefings  for
VIP's  have  pointed  out  that  if  Hanoi  is  bombed,   Saigon  can
be hit  in  reprisal;  that  if  Haiphong  harbor  is wrecked,  Saigon's
can  be turned  into  a shambles  even  more  easily. This has finally
been  brought  home  to  the  Republican  opposition.    The  U.S. is
in  a  bind,  and  that  bind  is  the  best  guarantee  that  Johnson  is
,  now  ready  for  real  peace  negotiations.     Privately,  for  the  first
time,  Administration  spokesmen   are  even  talking  of   a  coali-
tion  government.    Now   is  the  time  for  all  neutral   forces  to
put  pressure  on  both  sides  to  cease  fire  and  to  talk.
We'll  Be Clod to Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stomped  Addressed   Envelope
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed  $5:
Name   ..........................................................................................
Street
City..Zone..
..State..
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name     ....................................................
Street     ..............................................................
1/17/66
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement   wished  D
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  200IS
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I   F   Stone's  Weekly     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week  in   December   and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5   in   the   U.S.:    W  in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe;    S20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED