I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966mar21.pdf

============================================================

Even If   We  Obliterated North  Vietnam, P.  2
First  Eliminate  the  Opposition,  And  Then  Hold  Free Elections?
"We will  remain  in  Vietnam  until  conditions  permit  genu-
inely  free  elections."
—Humphrey  al  the  National  Press Club, March  11
"You    know  what  we  are  going  to  have  for  elections  over
there  is  when  there  are  not  any  Viet  Cong  left  to  vote,  and
then  we  are  going  to  call  those  free   elections."
—-Senator  Morse  to  Prof.  A.  Doak  Bamett  at  the  Senate
foreign   Relations  Committee  hearing,  March  8.
LF. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  11MARCH  21,  1966
WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
15  CENTS
Those  Who  Would  Also  Die,  Have  A  Right  to  Be  Consulted
Why  de Gaulle Wants NATO  Bases Out  of France
In  Elie  Abel's  book,  "The   Missile  Crisis,"   there  is  a  story
which  may  help   us  to  understand   why  de  Gaulle  wants  a
change  in  France's  relations  with  NATO.    Mr.  Abel  adds  a
graphic  and  revealing  story  to  our  knowledge  of  Dean  Ache-
son's  special  trip  to  Paris  at  the  time.    It  was  his  task,  as
Presidential  emissary, to  let  de  Gaulle  know  that  the  U.S.  was
ready  for  a nuclear  confrontation  with  the  Soviet  Union  unless
its  nuclear  missiles  were  removed  from  Cuba.    Mr.  Abel  re-
lates  that  before  Acheson  could  deliver  the  message  de  Gaulle
"raised  his  hand  in  a  delaying  gesture  that  the  long  departed
Kings  of  France  might  have  envied"  and  asked,  "May  we  be
clear  before you start.    Are you consulting  or  informing  me?"
Acheson  confessed  that  he  was there  "to  inform,  not  consult."
Yet  if  the  missiles  had  not  been  removed  and  if  nuclear  war
had  begun,  France  would  at  once  have  been  drawn  in.    U.S.-
controlled  NATO  bases  on  French  soil  would  have  gone  into
action  and  been   the  targets  of  Soviet  attack.    France   might
have  found  itself  crippled  or  destroyed  within  a  few  hours  or *
days  because  of  a  distant  conflict  in  the  Caribbean  in  which
she  had  little  interest  and  on  which  neither   France  nor  any
other  NATO  ally—not  even  England,  as  Abel's   book   also
shows—had  been  consulted.    An  alliance   in  which  the  life
and  death  of  all  may  be  decided  by  the  will  of  one  member,
is  not  an  alliance.    It  is  a  form  of  empire.
It  Depends  On  Whose  Ox  Is  Expropriated
Khrushchev  did  not  consult  his  allies  of  the  Warsaw  Pact
before  taking  the  risky  step  of  putting  the  missiles into  Cuba.
Kennedy  did  not  consult  his  allies of  the  Atlantic Pact  before
deciding he would  risk  a thermonuclear  world  war  to get  them
out.    The  fate  of  Europe,  East  and  West,  was  in  the  hands  of
two  outside  powers,  America  and  Russia.    Neither   in  other
circumstances  would  allow  one  of  its  allies  to  embark  on  a
course  which  might   draw  it  into   a  world   war;  both  even
joined  hands  in  effect  to  force  English  and  French withdrawal
from  the  Suez  when  Egypt  seized  the  Canal  from  its  Anglo-
French  owners.   Neither  power  thought  the  seizure  worth  the
risk  of  a  world  war;  neither  American  nor  Russian  interests
were  directly  affected.     Both  were  more  concerned  with  the
friendship  (and  oil)  of  the  Arab  world  than  with  the finan-
cial  loss  to  England  and  France.   We  have twice risked wider
war  over  Cuba  (at  the  Bay  of  Pigs  and  in  the  missile  crisis)
rather  than negotiate  Cuba's  seizure of  United  Fruit Company
U  Thant's  Quietly  Anguished   Appeal
'The  Secretary  General  is  deeply  concerned  over  the
escalation  of  the  fighting  in  Vietnam  and  the  mounting
casualties  and the  destruction  there.   He feels  that  any
move  to  bring  the  parties  closer  to  negotiation   must
include  the  following:
"(1)   Cessation   of   the  bombing  of   North  Vietnam.
(2)   Substantial  reduction by  all  parties  of  all  military
activities  in  South  Vietnam.    (3)   The  participation of
the  National  Liberation Front  (Vietcong)  in  any  peace-
ful  settlement."
—Statement  by  U  Thant  at  UN  Headquarters,   New
York  March  9 and given  scant  attention by  V.  S.  press.
We  suggest  that  peace  groups  might  be  well  advised
to  use  U  Thant's  statement  as  their  peace  pledge.    It
links  settlement  with  UN  leadership  which  Johnson  has
invoked  and  ignored.    The  U.S.  is  doing the  exact  oppo-
site  of  what  U  Thant  advises—it  is  intensifying   the
bombing  of  the  North,  it  is  steadily  increasing  its  mili-
tary  activity  in  the   South  and  it   is  moving   further
away  from  recognition   of  the   NLF.
land  and  oil  company  refineries.   But  the  English  and  French
governments  were   forced   to  negotiate  compensation  as  best
they  could  with  Nasser.  It  was  the  Suez  crisis which  gave  ma-
jor  impetus  before  de Gaulle  to  French  development  of  an  in-
dependent  nuclear  deterrent  so  it  would  not  be  completely  at
the  mercy  of  its  great  ally,  the  United  States.    This  is  what
American  opinion  refuses  to   see.
France  was  not  consulted  when  the  U.S.   teetered  on   the
brink  of  using  nuclear  arms  against  China  in  the  Korean  war
and  risking  a  world  war  with  Russia.    France  was  not  con-
sulted  on  Cuba.    France  is not  being  consulted  today  on  Viet-
nam,    though   the  widening  of  that  war,  too,   might  engulf
France.    This  is  what  de  Gaulle  said  at  his  last  press  con-
ference   (Feb.  21):
.  .  .  while the  prospects of  a  world  war  breaking  out  on
account   of    Europe   are   dissipating,    conflicts    in    which
America  engages  in  other  parts  of  the  world—as  the  day
before   yesterday  in   Korea,  yesterday  in   Cuba,  today  in
Vietnam—risk,  by  virtue  of  that  famous  escalation,  being
extended  so  that  the  result  could  be  a  general  conflagra-
tion.     In   that   case   Europe—whose   strategy   is,   within
NATO,  that  of  America—would  be  automatically  involved
in  the  struggle,   even  when  it   would  not  have  so  desired
(Continued   on   Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  21, 1966
What  Country  in  the  World  Most  Needs  to  Be  Contained?  .  . .
Containment  But  Not   Isolation—There  is  only  one  nation
on  earth  which  has  military  bases  on  every  inhabited continent
and  a  fleet  in  every  open   sea.     Its  nuclear  armed, submarines
and  surface  warships  patrol  the  Atlantic,  the  Pacific,  the  Car-
ibbean,  the  Mediterranean, and  the  Indian  Ocean.    It  is  the
only  nation  which  keeps  nuclear  armed  bombers flying on  alert
thousands   of   miles   from   its  own   skies,  as  the   bombs   acci-
dentally  dropped   on  Spain  revealed.     Such  a  nation,  its  guns
cocked  to  visit  instant  death  on  any  other  country  of  which  it
disapproves,  presents  a  world  problem.    Were  its   destructive
power  to  fall  into  irresponsible  hands,  it  could   render  much
of   the  earth  uninhabitable.    We   can  imagine  no   nation   to
which  the  doctrine  of  containment  more  aptly  applies.     The
No.   1  problem   of  humanity  is  to  contain  the  United   States.
But  we  are  against  its  isolation.    America's  vast  power  makes
it   difficult   for   the  United  Nations  to  operate  as  it  should,
but   we  would   strongly  oppose  its  exclusion   from   the   UN.
The  only hope of  mellowing  its ethnocentric  views  and  strong-
arm  habits  is  to  bring  it  more  fully   into  the  council  of   na-
tions.    Containment  but  not  isolation—that   seems  to  us  the
perfect   formula.
What    We   Fear   Afnst   in  South  Vietnam:     Over   and   over
again  the  President  has  assured  us  that  we  are  only  in  South
Vietnam  to  see  that  no  government  is  imposed   upon  its  peo-
ple  against  their  will.    But  every  time,  as  now  in  the  wake  of
General  Thi's  ouster,  they  demand  restoration   of  civilian  and
representative  rule,  a  thrill  of  horror  runs  through   our   bu-
reaucracy,  as  if  such  thoughts   were  indecent.     For   12  years
we  have  been   South   Vietnam's  paymaster  and  military  pro-
tector.    In  all  that  time  we  have  imposed  one  military  dicta-
torship  after  another  upon  its people.    General Thi  is popular
because  he  was  the  only  member  of  the  ruling  military  clique
who  had  ever  risked  his  neck  in  a  struggle  against  despotism;
he  staged  an  unsuccessful  uprising  against  Diem  and  had  to
take  refuge  in  Cambodia.    He  allowed  students  and  Buddhists
—the.majority  faith  —some  freedom.of  expression  in  his  area
of   command.    That's  just  why  U.S.   agencies  hailed   his  re-
moval  as  a  step  toward  greater  stability.    The  recurrent   night-
mare  of  the  U.S.  embassy  is what  to  do  if  some  day,  somehow,
the  people  of  South  Vietnam  erect  a  government  of  their  own
choosing  and  ask  us  to  leave  so  they  can  negotiate  peace  with
the  Viet  Cong.  This  is  why  we  fear  nothing  more  deeply  in
South  Vietnam than  the  democracy  we  claim  to  be  defending.
Mindless   Toughness  But:    The  most  fascinating   aspect  of
the  opinion   poll   on  the  Vietnamese   war   by  seven    Stanford
social  scientists  is  the  glimpse   into   the  complexities   of   U.S.
popular  thinking,  or  lack  of  it.    For  this  poll  shows  that  un-
thinking  tough-guy  attitudes  dominate   popular  views   toward
Even   If   North   Vietnam   Were  Obliterated?
Mr.  MAHON   (D.  Tex):  Do  you  believe  we  can  win
the   war   in  South  Vietnam   solely   by   the   bombing  of
North  Vietnam?
Secretary   McNAMARA:   Not   just   by   bombing   the
North.    This  yiew  is  not  shared   by  all,  but  it   is  cer-
tainly  my  strong   personal  opinion.
Mr.   MAHON:  If   you   could  persuade  the   people  in
North  Vietnam  to  stop  their  aggression   in  South  Viet-
nam,  wouldn't  you  by  bombing  North  Vietnam achieve
victory?
Secretary  McNAMARA:  I  do  not  believe  that  so  long
as  the  Viet  Cong  advance  militarily  in  the  south,  any
amount  of  bombing  in  the  north  will  cause  North  Viet-
nam  to  call  off  the  aggression  in  the  south.
Mr.  MAHON:  If  we  adopted  a  policy,  and  a program,
for  the  obliteration, for  all  practical purposes,  of  North
Vietnam,  would  that  end  the  war?
Secretary   McNAMARA:   In   my   opinion   it   will   not
completely  stop  the   North  Vietnamese  support  of   the
operations  in  South  Vietnam.   Most  of   the  arms  and
ammunition  is  provided  by  other  Communist  countries.
(Discussion  off  the  record)
Mr.  MAHON: That  is  a  matter  of  opinion, of  course.
General   Wheeler   [Chairman,  Joint  Chiefs   of   Staff],
do  you  believe  that  the  practical  obliteration of  North
Vietnam    would   successfully   end   the    war    in   South
Vietnam?
Gen.  WHEELER: I  doubt  it,  sir.  .  .  .
—Testimony  (pps.   32-3)  before   the  House    Appropri-
ations  Committee  in  executive  session  Jan.  26  five  days
before   the, bombing  of  the  north  was  resumed;  the  cen-
sored  hearings  were  not  released  until  March  11.
Cuba,  China  and  Russia.  Little  Cuba  especially  seems  to  bring
out  the  bully  in  us;  64%   even  of  those  who  favor  negotiat-
ing  our  way  out  of  the  Vietnam  war  think  we  have  been   "too
soft"  and  only  3%  think  we  have  been  "too  tough"  on  Cuba.
We're  not  quite  as  ready  to  be  as  tough  with  China   (it's   too
big).     Of   those  who  oppose  negotiation,   68%   thought  us
"too   soft"  on  China;  of  those  for  negotiating,  49%  thought
us  "too   soft"  and  only  3%   "too  tough."  Toward  Russia,  with
atom   bombs  as  big  as  ours,  the  public's  attitude  is  not   quite
as  tough—only  51%  of  those  againsr^negotiation  thought  we
were   "too   soft"  on  Russia  as  againsE'
i
46%  of  those  who  fa-
vored   negotiation.    But  despite  these  "tough  guy"    attitudes,
88%  of  the  adult  population   favors  negotiation  with  the  Viet
Cong;  70%  would  support  a  UN-negotiated  truce;  54%  favor
free  elections  in  South  Vietnam,  even  if  the  Viet  Cong  might
win  and  52%  would  be  willing  to  see the  Viet  Cong  partici-
pate  in  a  coalition  government  in  South  Vietnam.    Much  of
this  may  be  due  to  the  Robert  Kennedy  statement,  which  was
made  on   Feb.   19,  before   the  poll  began.     It   shows   public
What  Generals  Like  Taylor  Forget  When They Talk  of  Mining Haiphong
".  .  .  the  ease  with  which  military  solutions  are  talked
up  for  every  American  difficulty  in  the  Far  East.  .  .  .  Yes-
terday  for  example,  we  heard  again,  but  this  time  from  an
Administration   confidant,  the   proposal   that   we   mine  the
North  Vietnamese  harbor  at  Haiphong.    With  Americans,
mining  the  harbor  .  .  .  sounds  neat  and sanitary  and seems
to  avoid  the   messy   elements   of   war  that   are  distressing
to  watch  on  TV  screens.    But  no  one  has   mentioned  the
fact   that  every  Navy  that  has  minelayers  also   has  mine-
sweepers. ...  I  cannot   imagine   Soviet   freighters   going
through  a  mine  field  without  the  Soviet  Navy  first  trying
to  get  rid of  the  mines. ...  Is  this  minelaying   something
we  would  have  to  keep  going  back  to,  to  do  over  and  over,
while   the   Chinese   or  Russians   kept   sweeping   them  out?
At  what  point  would  American  Navy  vessels  begin   inter-
cepting  the  mine  sweepers?  .  .  .  Putting  mines  anywhere
around  Haiphong  is  going  to  mean  confrontations  at   some
point  with  nations  whose  vessels  are  sunk.  .  .  .  What  would
be  American  response   to  a  mine  laid  by  China  or   Russia
in  the  Gulf   of  St.  Lawrence?"                    —Morse,  March  7
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  SI, 1966
.  .  .  The  Rusk-McNamara   "Big   Lie"  Equating  Mao  With  Hitler
opinion  fluid,  and  much  more  ready  than  the Administration
to  deal  with  the  men  we  are   fighting.   The  obstacle  is  in  the
White  House,  not  in  the  country.
Vietnam   and  Watts:     The  fresh  outbreak  of   racial  rioting
in  Los  Angeles  makes  especially  pertinent  the  poll's  findings
on  how  the  public  feels  about  the  war  and  domestic  spending.
The  majority  have  reservations  about  continuing  the  war  when
faced  with  its  possible  costs:  79%  oppose  cutting  aid  to  edu-
cation  if  necessary to  continue  the  war;  two-thirds  oppose  cut-
ting  medicare;  two-thirds oppose  raising  taxes;  majorities  also
oppose  introducing economic  controls  or  cutting  back  the  war
on  poverty.    Education  and  the  war  on  poverty  seem  to  have
the   strongest   support.     Even  those  who   approve   Johnson's
handling  of  the  war  are  78%  opposed  to  any cut  in  education
to  meet  increased  costs,  and  only  46%   of  them  would  favor
cutting  the  war  on  poverty  in  order  to  continue  the  fighting.
Obviously  Johnson's  old  Southern  Senator  friends  are  not  very
representative.
The  Big  Lie:    The  consistent  pattern  of  the  Johnson   Ad-
ministration  has  been  to  cloak  the  buildup  for  ever  bigger  war
with  fresh  talk  about  peace.    Now  it  has  picked  up  the   "con-
tainment,  but  not  isolation"   line  from  the  professors  appear-
ing   before   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations  Committee.     This
line  itself  reflects  the  unwillingness of  the  academic  establish-
ment  on  China  policy  to  break  too  openly  with  the  Admin-
istration.    The  McCarthy  years  have  left  behind  a  residue  of
timidity   and   the   academics  interlock   with   the   government;
many  are  well-paid consultants,  others  enjoy  security clearance,
still  others  hope  for  government  jobs,  some  commute   between
Washington   and  Academia;  all  look   for  support   to   govern-
ment  grants  and  the  largesse  of  the  great  Foundations,  which
are  part  of  the  establishment.    So  the  witnesses   so  far   have
been   afraid   to  oppose  the  war,  and  to  depart   too  far   from
official   cliches.    Their   most   important   contribution   has   been
to  dispute  the  official  U.S.  interpretation  of  the  Lin  Piao  state-
ment  as  a  Chinese  Mein   Kampf.      The   experts,   on  the  con-
trary,  term  it  a warning  to the  rebels  in  Vietnam  and  elsewhere
that  they  can  expect  little  help  from  China  and  are  on   their
own.     Rusk  and  McNamara  are  guilty  of  unscrupulous   and
inflammatory   propaganda   when   they   portray   the   Lin   Piao
statement  as  a  blueprint  for  world  conquest  and  equate  Mao
McCarthyism  In  The  Poverty   Program
The   Office   of   Economic  Opportunity's  new   "Person-
nel  Policies  and  Procedures"  for  the  Community  Action
Program  could  rule  out   employment  of   many  people
the  "war  on  poverty" is  designed  to  reach.   The  section
on   "Standards   for   Selections"   says:   "Recent  convic-
tion  of  a  crime  involving  moral  turpitude shall  be  con-
sidered  strong  evidence  of  failure  to  meet  these  stand-
ards."     In   Washington   alone,   two   community  action
groups  were  recently   formed  exclusively   of   men  who
had  been  in  trouble  with  the  police.    "What  do  we  do
now,"  wondered  one   local   poverty   official,   "ask   them
to  get  out  of  the  war  on  poverty?"    This  same  provi-
sion  might  be  used  in  the  South  against  those  arrested
in  connection  with  civil  rights  demonstrations.    A  rule
against   membership  in  "subversive"   organizations  in-
cludes  a  reference  to  "manifestations  of  disloyalty  to
the  United  States."    Will  this  bar  people  who  oppose
the  war  in Vietnam?  The  principle danger  in  the  guide-
lines  is  their  vagueness.    "What  does  'subversive'  mean
or  'crimes  involving  moral  turpitude'?"  asked  one  high
poverty   program   official.     The   language,   he   said,   is
so  vague  "that  just  about  anybody  could  be  excluded."
—P.O.
with  Hitler.     One  test  of  Administration  sincerity  in  claim-
ing  that  it  seeks  a  modus  vivendi  with  China   is  whether   it
abandons   this  Goebbels-style  Big  Lie.
LBJ   and  Agrarian   Reform:      The   most   striking  omission
from  President  Johnson's  statement  on  the  fifth  anniversary of
the  Alliance  for   Progress  was  any  mention   of   land   reform,
no  small  oversight  in  dealing  with  a  largely  peasant  and  land-
hungry  area.    The   statement  hails   "most  hopeful   signs"  of
a  renewal  of  large-scale  private  investment  in  Latin  Amer-
ican   development."      No   doubt   talk   of   agrarian   reform   is
being   soft-pedalled   lest  it  discourage   investors.     Dan   Kurz-
man   reported   in   the   Washington   Post   (March    13)    from
Guatemala   City  that   Julio   Cesar   Mendez   Montenegro,   the
only   civilian   candidate   permitted   to   run   in   its   presidential
election  and  the  one  who  got  the  highest  vote,  would  be  al-
lowed   to  take   office   after   private   assurances   to   the  military
and  the  large  landowners.     The   largest  of  these,  of   course,
and  by  far,  is  our  United  Fruit  Company,  which  got  the  CIA
to  overthrow  Arbenz  and  restore   its  land   12  years  ago.
Why  There Was  So Disappointing A  Turnout in  The Poverty Board Elections
Sargent   Shriver's   March   8   assessment   of   community
elections  of  the  poor  to  anti-poverty  boards  was   accurate.
They  have  been  a  failure.   Of  seven  elections  to  date,  only
one,  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  attracted  more  than  10%  of   the
eligible  voters.    Elections  in  Chester  and  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
Boston,   Cleveland,  Kansas   City   and   Los   Angeles    have
drawn  an  average  of  barely  3.5%.   Mr.  Shriver's  reluctance
to  hold  further  elections,  however,  is  premature.   The  rea-
son  for  the  low  turnouts  is   not—as  some   editorials   have
suggested—the  apathy  of  the  poor  (though  this  is  certainly
a  problem).   Underlying  the  election  failures  are  a  complex
of  factors,  some  political,  others  simply  mechanical.
In  Los  Angeles,   for  example,  less  than  1%  of  the   elec-
torate  of   400,000  went   to  the   polls   March   1.    'The  poor
have  now  had  an  opportunity  to  be  heard,"  said  the  Wash.
Star  (Mar.  5)  "obviously  .  .  .  impassioned  civil  rights  ad-
vocates  have  grossly  overstated  their  case."   In  fact,  plan-
ning  for  the  LA  vote  was  so  poor,  that  a  larger  showing
would  have  been surprising.   From a  budget  of  $61,000 only
$5000  was  spent   on   "communications."     The  bulk   of   the
money  went  to  poll  watchers  and  vote  counters  in  the  154
school  buildings  spread  over  a  4000  sq.  mile  area.    At  least
one  reliable  observer   reported   that   inadequate   provisions
were  made  for  transporting  voters  the  long  distances  many
had  to  travel.   Although a  number of  the  voters  were  Span-
ish-speaking,   none  of   the   official   campaign   literature  was
printed  in  Spanish.    Finally,  as  one  Watts   resident  noted,
the  election  was  held  on  the  day  welfare  checks  came.  Most
women  were  busy  watching  for  the  mailman  or  shopping.
For  months,  politicians  had  been  deriding  the  importance
of  the  outcome.    "It's  a  shame  to  take  the  time  and  energy
of  so  many  people,"  said  Mayor  Sam  Yorty.    One  Los  An-
geles  County  supervisor  remarked  the  election  was   "obvi-
ously  masterminded by  political  offices  which  hoped  to  con-
trol  the  poor."    As  evidence,  the  districts  were  so  gerry-
mandered  that  Watts  was  denied  a  full  representative.    In
the  end,  few  of  the  poor believed  their  vote  would  make  any
impact  on  the  poverty  program.                    —Peter  Osnos
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  21,1966
One  Point  on Which  All  Our  NATO  Allies  Secretly  Agree With  de Gaulle
Continued  from   Page   One
.  .  .  France's  determination  to  dispose  of  herself ...  is
incompatible   with   a   defense    organization   in   which   she
finds  herself   subordinate.
De  Gaulle  is  not  asking  the  end  of  the  Atlantic Pact.     He  is
asking  the   removal   of  NATO   bases  which   are   not   under
French  control  so  that  war  may  be  made  from  them  without
French  permission.   In  this  he  is not  asking  for  more  than  we
long  ago  granted   Franco.    The  Spanish  dictator  allows   U.S.
bases  on  Spanish  soil  only  under  a  bilateral  agreement  which
gives  Spain  a  veto  over  the  use  of  those  bases  for  war.    The
crafty  Franco  used  Axis aid  to  seize  power,  and  then  gave  the
Axis  no  more  than  token  support  in  the  last  war.    He  is  still
free  to  treat  us  the  same  way  if  we  got  involved  in  a  conflict
which  he  considered  of  no  interest  to  Spain.
When  NATO  Was   Anti-Colonialist
The  removal  of NATO  bases  will  leave  France  free  to  stand
aside  if  the  Vietnamese  war  widens  into  war  with  China.    In
this  respect  the  politics  of  NATO  has  come  full  circle.    Most
Americans  have  forgotten  why  the  pact  between  us  and  West-
ern  Europe  was  called  a  North  Atlantic  treaty  and  limited  to
the  North   Atlantic.    Secretary  of  State  Acheson  made  clear
that  he  did  not  intend  to  obligate  the  United  States  to  help
our  North   Atlantic  allies  to  maintain  their  possessions   else-
where  in  the  world.    The  only  non-European  territory  covered
was  Algeria.    Neither  the  third   of   Africa  which  was  then
French,  nor  Indochina,  where  war  had  been  raging  for  three
years,  was  covered.    When  -France  five  years  later   asked  our
aid  to  save  Dienbienphu,  she  could  not  invoke  NATO.    But
now  we  are  trying to  use NATO  in  the  Far  East.   McNamara
sought  to  drum  up  feeling  against  China  at  the  last  NATO
Council  meeting.    The  NATO  powers   are  being   pressed   to
send  aid  to  Vietnam.    De  Gaulle  on  the  other  hand  is  cul-
tivating  friendly   relations  with  China  as  well  as  Russia  and
continues  to  warn  us  that  no  military  solution  is  possible  in
Vietnam.    "Lacking  the  ability—which  is  a  matter  of  means
—but  also  the  will—which  is  a  matter  of  conscience,"  he  said
of  Vietnam  at  his  last  press  conference,  "to  wipe  out  all  re-
sistance  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  there  is  no  way  of  putting
an  end  to  this  war  other  than  by  concluding  peace."  He  sees
Somebody   Likes  Rusk—An  Accolade  to   Soapy
Johannesburg,   South  Africa  —  The  pro-Government
newspaper   Vaderland   today   expressed   the   hope   that
the   U.S.   will   appoint   someone   outside   the   ranks   of
"leftist   intelligentsia"  to  succeed   G.  Mermen  Williams
as   Under   Secretary  of   State  for  African   Affairs.    It
said,   "We  will  not  wipe  away  tears  or  rejoice   in   his
departure   because   if   his   successor   comes   from   the
ranks  of  the  Leftist   intelligentsia  swarming  in  multi-
plex  African  institutes   or  organizations  in  the   United
States,  it  will  be a  case  of  one  worse  than  another.    We
just  hope  Mr.  Williams'  successor  will  be  someone  who
will  behave  with  the  same  responsibility   in  the  field  of
relations   between    nations   as   the   vast   majority    of
American  policy  leaders  such  as  Mr.  Dean   Rusk."
—United  Press  International   ticker  March  9
the  path  to  peace  as  reconvening  of  the  Geneva   conference,
"an  end  to  all  foreign  intervention  in  Vietnam"  and   "conse-
quently,  neutrality  of  the  country."    This  implies  the  end  of
a  separate  South  Vietnam  as  an  American  protectorate   and  re-
unification  of  the  country  independently  of  all  the  great  Pow-
ers.    De  Gaulle  ended  by  saying  "it  must  be  acknowledged
that  this  road   is  not  being  taken."     De   Gaulle,   by  freeing
France  from  NATO  bases,  is telling  us  that  if  the  road  we  are
taking  leads  to  a  wider  war  France  may  sit  it  out.
Mr.  Abel  reports  that  after  Acheson  told  de  Gaulle  he  was
not  there  to  consult  him  about  the  Cuban  missile  crisis,   de
Gaulle  replied  dryly, "I  am in  favor  of  independent  decisions."
He~to1d  Acheson,   "You   may  tell  your  President  that  France
will  support  him.    1 think  that  under  the  circumstances  Presi-
dent  Kennedy  had  no  other  choice.    This  is  his  national  pre-
rogative   and  France  understands."     But  in  Vietnam  and  in
dealing  with  China,  de  Gaulle  thinks  we have  other  and wiser
choices  than  the  course  we  are  pursuing.     He  is  clearing  the
decks  so  that  this  time  he  can  exercise  his  "national   preroga-
tive"   and   he,   too,   can  make  independent   decisions.     Since
1958   de  Gaulle   has  been   trying  unsuccessfully  to   establish
machinery  for  consultation  inside NATO.   This  is his  declara-
tion  of   independence.     It   is  a  protest,   with  which   all  our
West  European   allies  secretly  sympathize,  against  the  possi-
bility  of  annihilation without  representation.
Index  for   1965    Ready  —    Send  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope   —    Renew  Your  Sub  and  Send  A  Gift  Sub  at  the  Same  Time
I.  P.  Stone's Weekly      5618 Nebraska  Ave., N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
3/21/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  send  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name   ..............................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  ;'/  announcement   wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except  in   August,  the  last   week   in   December  and   the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave.,   N.W..   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly   published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   15   in   the   U.S.;     S6   in   Canada;    SIO   elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
$15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED