I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966nov28.pdf

============================================================

Eye-Witness:   How  We  Burn  'Em  Up  in  Vietnam,  Pp*.  2-3
Understatement  of  the  Year
"The  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  and  the  Ho  Chi  Minh     and  supplies  from  North  to  South."
trail  has  not  of  course  absolutely  stopped the  flow  of  men           —Jos.  Alsop  Nov.  18 arguing  against  any  bombing pause.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  38November  28,  1966
">'       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
If  Only  The  Albanians  Had  A  Sense  of Humor
If   the  Albanians  had  a  sense  of  humor,  they  would   sup-
port  the  Italian  resolution  at  the  UN   for  a  commission  to
study  the  China  problem,  but  with  an  amendment, instructing
it  also  to  study  the  American  problem.   They  would   suggest
that  the  UN,  if  it  was  to  survive  as  a  force  for  world  order,
really  had  two  problems.   One  was  whether  to  let  Peking  in.
The  other  was  whether  to  let  Washington   out.   The  Ameri-
cans,   the   Albanians  might   admit,   are   smoother   than   the
Chinese.   While  Peking  insults  U  Thant,  the  wily  Occidentals
flatter  but  ignore  him.    Both  undercut  the  UN.
Too  Many Wars  of  National  Liberation
As   the   delegate   from   the   other   China   argues,   it's   not
simply   a   question   of   universality.   Membership   should   be
open  only  to  those  nations  sincerely  prepared  to  abide  by  the
Charter.    Article   2,  Sec.  3,  obligates   all  members  "to   settle
their   international   disputes   by   peaceful   means   in   such   a
manner   chat  international  peace  and  security  .  .  .  are  not
endangered."   Is  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  in  accord-
ance  with  this  principle?   Peking  is  not  the  only  big  power
which  worries  its  neighbors.   Article  2,  Sec.  4,  obligates  all
members  to  "refrain  .  .  .  from  the  threat  or  use  of   force"
against   the   "political   independence   of   any  State."    Under
Eisenhower  the  U.S.  overthrew  the  government  of  Guatemala;
under   Kennedy,   it   tried   to   overthrow   the   government  of
Cuba;  under  Johnson,   it  sent  troops  to  reshape  the  govern-
ment  of  Santo  Domingo.    These  American  "wars  of  national
liberation,"  the  Albanians  might  point  out,  are  as  upsetting
as  China's.
An  even  greater   danger—they  might  argue—is  Washing-
ton's  interpretation  of  Article  51.   This  allows  any  member,
"if   an  armed  attack  occurs,"  to  take  measures  of  "individual
or  collective  self-defense"  but  only  until  the  Security Council
acts.   Any  measures under  Article  51 must  be  reported  "imme-
diately"  to  the  Security  Council.   The  purpose  was  to  allow
for  self-defense  without  splitting  the  world  again  into  hostile
blocs.   Chapter  VIII  of  the  Charter  does  allow  for  "regional
arrangements"  but  within control  of  the  world  body.  Article
54  says  the  Security Council  "shall  at  all  times  be  kept  fully
informed  of  activities  undertaken  or  in  contemplation"  under
these   arrangements.   Washington   has   used   Article  51   and
Chapter   VIII   to  create  a  world-wide  network  of  alliances.
The   military  planning   committees   of   the   OAS,   NATO,
CENTO  and   SEATO  have   never   yet  reported   their   plans
Everything  Mini  But  The Napalm
"Washington,  Nov. 18—Secretary  of  State  Dean Rusk
suggested  today  that  the  U.S.  might  agree  to  a  brief
Christmas  cease-fire in Vietnam but ...  he  seemed  in-
tent  on ruling out  a  repetition of  last  year's  experience,
when  a  Christmas  truce  led  to  a  37-day  suspension  of
American  air  strikes  against  North  Vietnam.  .  .  . The
expectation  of  American officials ...  is  that Pope  Paul
VI  will  issue  a  truce  appeal  as  he  did  last  year.    In
anticipation  of  such  a  move, State  Department  officials
have  coined a  word 'minitruce'..."
—New York Times, November  19.
While  we're  coining  such  useful   phrases,   why  not
this  year  proclaim mini-peace on  earth,  with  mini-good
will  to  all  men, for  a  mini-Christmas by  a mini-Chris-
tian country ?
to   the   Security  Council.    The   result   is   a  rival   system   for
policing  the  world,  indeed  two  of  them,  one  led  by  NATO,
the  other  by  the  Warsaw  Pact.   The  Framers  of  the  Charter
sought  to  prevent   just  such  a  squaring  off  for  a  new  war.
The   Albanians  might   suggest   that   both   Washington   and
Moscow   be   asked   to   dissolve   these   rival   alliances   as   the
price  of  continued  membership  in  the   UN.
The  Albanians  might  also  propose  that  while  the  Commis-
sion  looked  into  the  two  China  problem,   it  study  a  parallel
difficulty.    The   world   was   confronted   with   many   divided
countries.   In  some,  as  in  Korea,  Germany  and  China,  divi-
sion   had   worked   fairly   well   in  preventing   or   ending  civil
war.    In  others  forcible  efforts  at  reunification  were  a  constant
threat  to  the  peace.   In  the  United  States,  for  example,   even
after  a  century,  the  South  was  still  unreconciled  to  its  forcible
subjugation   by  the  North.   Every  UN   member   knew   what
shocking  murders  went  unpunished  in  the  South  as  Northern
agitators  infiltrated,   particularly  when   they  tried  to   stir   up
the  peasantry  in  the  Mississippi  delta  against  their  landlords.
The   situation   was   incredibly  confused,   with   a   Southerner
leading   the  North   and   another   Southerner   from  Alabama
named  Wallace  trying hard  to  stage  a  counter  invasion.  There
was   the   constant   danger   of   a   new   civil   war   and   foreign
intervention.   If  in  the  interests  of  world  peace,  there  were
to  be  two  Chinas  in  the  UN,  perhaps  there  ought  also  to  be
two  Americas,  one  Confederate,  one  Yankee,   with  Lyndon
Johnson  in  the  Security  Council  and  Lurleen  Wallace  in  the
General  Assembly.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  88, 1966
Sample  Excerpts  From  A  Superb  Piece  of Reporting  in  Flying  Magazine  . ..
Frank  Harvey,  military  aviator,   novelist   and   reporter
spent  6 weeks  in  Vietnam  and  wrote  a  special   supplement
on  the  air  war   there  for   the  November   issue  of  Flying,
which  is  unsurpassed   for  its  picture  of  what  the  war  is
doing  to  our  fliers  and  Vietnam's   people.   All  the   excerpts
on  these  two  pages  are  from   that  issue  which  can  be  ob-
tained  (75  cents)   from   Flying   Magazine,  1  Park  Avenue,
New   York   10016.
By  Frank  Harvey
The  dominating:  figures  of  the  air   war  in  the   [Mekong]
Delta  are  the  forward  air  controllers.   They  fly  around  look-
ing  for   signs  of  guerrilla  activity   in  little  single-engined
Cessnas  known  as  O-l  Bird  Dogs.  .  .  .  The  FACs  have  the
authority  to  call  missions  only after  approval by the  province
chiefs,   except  in  dire  emergency   when   friendly  troops   are
under  fire.  They  have  the  authority  to  divert  planned  strikes
to  targets  of  opportunity   when  they  think  necessary.    They
cruise  over  the  Delta  like  a vigilante  posse, holding  the  power
of  life  and  death  over   the  Vietnamese  villagers  living   be-
neath  their  daily  patrol. ...
From  the  air  all  the  communities  in  the  Delta  look bucolic
and  peaceful  to  the  unpracticed   eye.    But  to  the  FAC  pilot
ordinary-looking  things  sometimes  read  danger. ... If  any-
thing  looks  suspicious,  the  FAC  can  radio  in  an  air  or  artil-
lery  strike  against  anything  in  the  Delta  within  a  matter of
minutes ...  at  his  beck  and  call  a  fleet  of  helicopters and
fighters equipped  with  a  terrifying  arsenal  of weapons.  .  . .
Still  Burning  In  His  Live  Flesh
The  FAC's  list  of fireworks is  long  and deadly  . : .  when
it  hits  and  ignites,  the  burning  napalm  splatters  around  the
area,  consuming  everything  it  comes  in  contact  with.    The
white  phosphorus   bombs  are  also  incendiaries.    In  the   civil-
ian  hospital   at  Can  Tho,  I  saw  a  man  who  had  a  piece  of
white  phosphorus  in  his  flesh.  It  was  still   burning.
The  CBU's—cluster  bomb  units—are  even   more  popular
with  the  FAC's  than  napalm.    The  CBU  consists  of  a   can-
ister  filled  with  about  800  metal  balls  the  size  of  softballs.
Inside  each  metal  ball  is  a  cluster  of  smaller  balls  or  "bomb-
lets."    Moving  through   the  air  with  the  forward  motion  of
the  jet  that  released  it,  the  larger  metal  balls  roll  out  of  the
Nice to Start By Bombing the Defenseless First
"Dixie  Station  [on  an  aircraft  carrier  off  South  Viet-
nam]  has  a  reason.    A  pilot  going  into  combat  for  the
first  time  is  a  bit  like  a  swimmer  about  to  dive  in  an
icy  lake.   He likes  to  get  his  big  toe  wet  and then  wade
around  a  little before  leaping  off  the  high  board.    So  it
is  fortunate  that  young  pilots  can  get  their  first  taste
of   combat  under  the  direction  of  a  forward  air   con-
troller   over  a  flat  country  in  bright   sunshine   where
nobody   is   shooting   back  with  high-powered   ack-ack.
He  learns  how  it  feels  to  drop  bombs  on  human  beings
and  watch  huts  go  up  in  a  boil  of  orange  flame  when
his  aluminum napalm tanks  tumble into  them.   He  gets
hardened  to  pressing  the  firing  button  and cutting  peo-
ple  down like  little cloth dummies  as  they  sprint  franti-
cally  under them.
"On  Yankee  Station,  some  hundreds  of  miles  to  the
north,  the  shoe  is  definitely  on  the  other  foot.    When
you  fly  into  North  Vietnam  against  the  triple-A  [anti-
aircraft]  and the  SAMs  (surface-to-air  missiles),  when
the  air  is  so  full  of  flak  bursts  you  can't  see  how  you
possibly   can  go   through  them  unhit,   the   experience
earned  on  Dixie  stands   you  in  good  stead.    Warm-up
lasts  a  week  to  10  days  before  you  steam  north   into
the real hell."
CBU  tube.   Then  compressed  air  scatters  the  bomblets  inside
in  all  directions.   These  go  off in  a  wide  swath  and  look  "like
sparklers"  from  the  air.    The  CBU's  kill  or  maim  anything
in  the  open  or  inside  a  hut  along  an  extended  path  a  couple
of  hundred  feet  wide.   If  you  can  use  these properly,  you  can
lawn-mower  for  considerable   distances   without  a  break.  . . .
The  VC hate  the  FAC.    It  is  he  who  fingers  the  death-
bringers.    If  they  catch  him  on  the  ground,  they  kill   him.
Near  Pleiku,  one FAC  was  literally  skinned  alive  by  the  VC.
More  FAC's  have  been  lost  in  Vietnam  than  any  other  type
of  pilot.
When  you  are  dawdling  around   at  70  knots   1500  feet  in
the  air  over  people  you intend  to barbeque, they  tend  to  want
to  zap you in the  behind.    Every  now and then  they  do.    ...
Said  the  Major  In  Charge  of  Defoliation:  "We Are  the  Most  Hated  Outfit  in  Vietnam"
"Ranch  Hand  is  the  code  name  for  the  defoliation  opera-
tion  in  South  Vietnam.   The  pilots  who  fly  the  Fairchild-
Hiller  C-123s  in  this  operation are  said  to  be  the  most  shot-
at  people  in  the  war.    They  are  known  by  the  crude  but
descriptive  name  of  'magnet-asses.'    Ranch  Hand's   motto,
lettered  over  the  Ready  Room  door:  'Only  We  Can  Prevent
Forests.'     Major   Ralph   Dresser,    USAF,   a   rugged   All-
American  football player  from  Texas,  is  Ranch  Hand's  com-
manding   officer.     Dresser   speaks   in   a   polite,   well-modu-
lated  voice,  and  uses  English  with  skill  and  precision.    But
be  gives  you  the  feeling  that,  if   he  decided  to,  he  could
simply  grab  your  arm, tear  it  off  and  hand  it  back  to  you.
One  might  sooner  kick  a  Bengal  tiger  than  say  something
nasty  to  Maj. Dresser.   He  runs  a  taut,  self-contained  unit
and  his  plane  has  been  hit  not  less  than  78  times.
"Ranch  Hand  operates  on  a  6-day  week,  two  mission  per
day  schedule.    A  mission  lasts  from  40 minutes to  2  hours—
depending   on  the   target.    The  seven-plane,   all  volunteer
squadron  has  earned  27  Purple  Hearts  and  seldom  returns
from   a  mission   without  bullet  holes,   largely   because   the
defoliant  spray  must  be  applied  from  a  height  of  150  feet
at  a  speed  of  130 knots.   Any  higher  and  the  spray   doesn't
get   on  the  foilage   in  sufficient   strength.     Any  lower  and
the  foilage  is  overkilled—a  waste  of  expensive   chemicals.
An  average  11,000-lb.  load  costs  $5,000,  takes  4  minutes  to
spread  and kills  everything  green  over  300 acres.  .  .  .
"Dresser  says  Mekong  Delta  missions  are  the  worst.   The
Delta  country  is  flat,  and  Vietcong   gunners  can  see  him
coming  for  miles.   They  have  time  to  get  set,  draw  a  bead
and  let  fly.  .  .  .  Rice  and  other  crops  that  might  feed   the
VC are killed....  'This is  a very touchy thing,' says  Dresser.
'A  mission  to  kill  crops  goes  right  to  Henry  Cabot  Lodge
for  approval.    It  can  boomerang  if  it's  not  handled  right.'
Peasants  who  lose  crops  are  supposed  to  be  paid in  full  for
their  losses.   Unfortunately they  aren't  always  paid  in  full.
Greedy   province  chiefs   and  sub-chiefs   sometimes   pocket
money   the   U.S.   earmarks  for   peasant   victims  of   Ranch
Hand.   'The  VC tell  the  peasants  that  our  spray  is  a  deadly
poison/  Dresser  said.    'But  I'm  going  to  show  you  it  isn't.
He  stuck  his  finger  under one  of  the  spigots  on  the  dispenser
drum,  then  licked  the  oily  stuff.     'It  tastes  like   kerosene
with   chemical   overtones—not   good,   but   hardly  a   deadly
poison  unless   you  drink  it,  which  nobody  is  likely  to  do.'
" 'We are the  most hated  outfit  in Vietnam,' Major Dresser
said.    'Nobody  likes  to  see  the  trees  and  the  crops  killed,
but  it's  necessary.'"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  November  SS, 1986
. Reveals What The Air War  Is Doing to Our  Pilots and Vietnam's People
Before  I  left  the  Delta, I  spent five days  and nights  in the
operating  rooms  and  wards  of  the  Can  Tho  civilian  hospital.
Usually  two  people  shared  a  bed  and  sometimes  the  emer-
gency  room  was  using  all  three  tables  at  the  same  time  and
people  were  lying  on  the  floor  and  even  outside  on  the  porch.
Most  injuries   were  from  gunshot,  mortar   or  napalm.    Dr.
Frank  Camp,  the  director   of  the  Air  Force  Surgical   Team
and  boss  of this huge  old hospital, told  me they  treated  more
civilians   there   than   the   Arvin   hospital   next   door  treated
wounded  soldiers. ... Of the  hundreds  of casualties,  a  very
high  percentage   were  women  and children.  .  .  .
They  Admire  "Charlie's" Courage
The  shop  talk  of  the  Huey  [armed  helicopter]  pilots  was
grim,  colorful  and  to  the  point.    "I  shot  up  Charlie  in  the
paddies  today,"  one of  them  said.   "I  ran  that  little  mother
all  over  the  place  hosing  him with  guns  but  somehow or  other
we  just  didn't  hit  him.    Finally  he  turned  on  us  and  stood
there facing  us with  his  rifle.   We really  busted  his  ass  then.
Blew  him  up  like  a  toy  balloon."    Another  pilot  commented
on  this.    "You  got  to  hand  it  to  those  little  mothers.    They
got  the  guts.   If  we had  them  on  our  side, we'd  wrap  up  this
war  in about  a  month."  . . .
The  missions  I  have  described  exemplify  the  fact  that  it
isn't  much  of  a  problem,  with  our  overwhelming  aerial  fire-
power,  to  shoot  up  Charlie  pretty  bad  once  we  engage  him.
It  isn't  easy  to  lose  with  a  modern  air  force  when  all  you're
up  against  is  small  arms  fire.  But  to  destroy  the  enemy you
first  have  to find him. ...
The  essence of  successful  guerrilla warfare  is  sneak attack.
.  . . The Viet  Gong  . . .  count  on being  able  to  strike  hard
without  warning  and vanish.  . . . Charlie  used  to feel  safe  in
his jungle redoubts.   He could light  up a  cooking fire at  night
and  eat  his  supper  with  serenity.   But  nowadays  we  fly  over
him  in  RF-4C  Phantoms  with  infrared  cameras  and  take  pic-
tures  in  which  his  fire  shows  up  as  a  white  dot  with  a  tail
.  .  . and suddenly  out of the  peaceful  sky a  large  explosive
shell  falls  in the  middle  of Charlie's  meal. ... If  word  comes
that  the  VC are  trying  to  get  a  little  rest  in  some  forest  re-
treat  like  the  Iron  Triangle,  31nm  north  of  Saigon,  the  Stra-
tegic  Air  Command  loads  a  flotilla  of  bombers  from  Guam
What  Will  Such  Men  Be  When  They  Return?
"Our combat  flyers  in Vietnam are  distinctly  different
from   those  in  past  American  wars,  because   they  are
career  pros,  almost  to  a  man.   The  average  age  of  our
pilots  there  is  33,  10  years  older  than  American  flyers
in  the  Second  World War.   And they're absolutely hard-
nosed.   You'll  never  find  these  qualities better exempli-
fied  than  in  the  Huey  gunship  13th Aviation  Battalion,
which headquarters at  Can Tho.   The  skipper,  Col. Wm.
Maddox,  has  the  look  of  a  gladiator.   His  eyes  glow
fiercely in  his  red-tanned  face.  . .  . The American  Huey
troops  at  Vinh  Long are  without doubt the  most  savage
guys  I  met  in  Vietnam  (and  the  jolliest!)    I  was  im-
pressed  by  them.   But they  scared  me. .  .  .  They  came
muttering  down  to  the  paddies  and  hootch   [hut]   line,
fired  at  close  range  and  saw  their  opponents  disinte-
grate  to  bloody  rags  40 feet  away. .  .  .  They  wore flak
vests  and after  a  fire  fight  was  won they  landed  on  the
battlefield,  got  out  and  counted  their  VC  dead.    Each
man   had  his  own  personal   sidearm   he  carried  along
for  mopping up."
with  fifty-one  750-pounders  per  plane,  flies  over  and  wipes
out a whole valley. . . . Once the VC in the Delta  are  located,
and  they  have  to stand  up and fight, they  have  about as  much
chance  against  American  air  power as  our  planes  would  have
against fleets of space  ships  with  death  rays. .
I  also  dropped  in  to  visit  the  Helio  Courier  U-lOs,  which
fly psychological  operations  out  of  Can  Tho.   They  fly  around
and  drop  Chieu  Hoi  (Open  Arms)  leaflets inviting the  VC to
come  in  and get  amnesty  and  rehab.   It  seems  to  be working
well.    A  substantial  number  of  VC  bring   in  the   leaflets—
which  is  certainly  better  for  them  and  for  us  than  shooting
them  up.   The  cost  of  killing  a  VC  is  estimated  to  be  over
$100,000  per  man.
In  another  portion  of  the  Flying  supplement,  Mr.  Har-
vey  describes  the  deadly  gauntlet   of  ack-ack  in  the  North,
the  high  toll  it  exacts  and  why  limits  are  imposed  on  the
bombing  of'the  North.   We  recommend it   highly.
A  Vivid  Account  of  How  and  Why  Our  Pilots  Sometimes  Get  An  Attack  of  Conscience
"I  saw  bright  aluminum  cigars  detach  from  his  belly  and
tumble  end  over  end.   Two  cans  of  napalm  hit  without  ex-
ploding.   Then more cans hit  and the  village was  obliterated
in  a  great  rolling  cloud  of   flame.   Involuntarily I  looked
away.    When  I  looked  back  two  of  the  huts  were burning
brightly.    'Couple  of  duds,'  the  F-100  jock  said  disgustedly
over  his  radio.   The   damned  igniters   must  have   goofed.'
"Now  the  two  jets  were  setting  up  their  strafing   pass.
They  took  their  time.    There  was  no  hurry.   Nobody  was
shooting  back.   One at  a  time,  they  made a  deliberate  race-
track  pattern  and  a  long  careful   final.   Then  they  flashed
over  the  village  at  40  knots  and  walked their  20mm  shells
through  the  houses  in  a  flurry  of  dusty  explosions.    When
they  had  fired  out  their  ammo  and  pulled  off  the  target,  I
asked  Col.  Goldsberry  if  he  would  please  take  me  home  as
I  felt  a  little  queasy.   He  was  a  very  considerate  man.   He
said  he  would indeed.
"A  FAC  [Forward  Air  Controller] must  be  very  sure  of
what  he's  doing  before  he  calls  in  the  jets.    He  can  kill  a
lot  of  innocent  people  if  he  makes  a  mistake,  which  some-
times happens.  I  met  a  FAC  who had been directing gunfire
from  Navy  destroyers  against  hootches  [native  huts—IFS]
and  VC concentrations for  several  months.   The  destroyers
were  many  miles  offshore  in  a  rolling  ocean.    This  young
man  had  been  relieved  of  duty  because  he  had  openly  de-
clared  himself  guilty  of  assisting   in  the  killing  of   many
civilians  because  the long-range guns had fired wild  so  often,
hitting  houses  and  people  in  the  vicinity  of  the  target  co-
ordinates.   It  was  impossible  not  to  feel  the  agony  this  boy
was  suffering.    'I  just  want  to  go  home  and  forget  it  for-
ever/  he  said.
"Another  FAC  who  had  just  flown  his  last  artillery-di-
recting  mission  over  a  nearby village was  in  the  bar  at  the
Eaton  compound in  Can  Tho.    He  said  he  was  going  back
home  to  the  States  the  next  day.   He  had  been  ordered  to
direct   artillery   against   a  village  because  'three  VC  were
reported  there  this  morning.'   He  got  over  the  village,  he
said,  and looked down  and all  he could see  were  men, women
and children  walking  around.   He radioed back  to  the Arvins
[Army   of   South  Vietnam—IFS]  and  told  them   he  didn't
see   anybody  who   resembled  a   VC  but   that   there   were
civilians  in  the  village.   Did  the  province  chief  really want
this  place  hit?    They  radioed back  that  the  province  chief
did,  and  to  send  the  coordinates.    'I  sent  them,'  this  young
FAC  told  me  and  drained  his  drink.
" 'You  must  have  seen  a  lot  of  people  killed,'  I  said.
" 'No,'  he  said.    'No  people  got  killed.    Nobody  was  in
the  paddy  where  I  directed the  artillery   fire.'"
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone'8  Weekly,  November  28, 1966
The  Government's  Sudden  Passion   for  Civil  Liberties  In  the  Bobby  Baker Case
More Creative Freedom Under  Czarism Than Even Now  in Post-Stalin  Russia
What   strikes  us  most  in   the   appeal   made  by  65   Soviet
writers  to  the  Kremlin  in  the  Sinyavsky-Daniel  case,  and  even
in  Lidiya Chukovskaya's  nobly  indignant  letter  to  the  novelist
Sholokhov   (see  texts  in  New   York   Times  Nov.   19)   is  that
they  do  not  quite  dare  to  affirm  the  necessity  for  freedom  of
expression,  whether  in  capitalist  or  socialist  society.    The  63
go  no  further  than  to  say  "We  need  more  freedom  for  artis-
tic  experiment."    Mme.  Chukovskaya  comes  closer  to  classic
liberal  doctrine  when  she writes,  "Ideas  should  be  fought  with
ideas,  not  with  camps  and  prisons."    But  none  are  quite  bold
enough  to  invoke  again  the  great  tradition  which  comes  down
from  Spinoza  and  Milton  and  Jefferson   and   affirms   freedom
of  thought  from  State  control  as  a  fundamental  value.    Until
this  idea  is grafted  on  to  socialism,  Sovietism  will  not  produce
a  good  society.    Those   "rootless  cosmopolitans",    Marx  and
Engels,  would  have  been  appalled  to  think  that  a  society  pre-
sumably  based  on  their   ideas  gives   less  freedom   to  writers
than  did  Czarism.    Mme.  Chukovskaya's  letter  cites  Tolstoy's
"Resurrection"  and  Dostoyevsky's  "House  of  the  Dead",  with
their  "humanizing  message",  against  Sholokhov's  lynch-spirit-
ed  neo-Stalinism.    It  is painful  to  realize  that  neither  book  if
newly  written  could  be  published  in  the  Soviet  Union  today.
We   cheer  the   cleansing  wind  that   begins   to   blow   in   this
writers'  revolt.
Wall Street  Journal Agrees
Only  Peace Can Save  LBJ
"Johnson  aims  to  rebuild  his  popularity  from  its  cur-
rent  low.   Main  approach: To  paint himself  as  a  states-
man,  toiling  for  posterity.    There'll  be  more  presiden-
tial  trips  abroad.    LBJ  will  stress  the  pluses  in   U.S.
foreign   policy.    Hell  angle  for   easing   of   Cold  War
tensions  via  some  rapproachement  with  Russia.   Look
for  new  effort  at  bipartisanship  in  foreign  policy,  with
more  Republican  consultations.
"Johnson  will  strive  to  revive  his  consensus  on  do-
mestic  matters.   Hell  hold  down  new  legislative  pro-
posals,  hoping  to  keep  up  his  batting  average  in  the
less  liberal  Congress.    'Hell  push  popular  plans,  like
fatter   Social   Security   benefits   that   don't  add  up  to
budget  strains.'    There'll  be  more  talk  about  'raising
the  quality'  of  American  life.
"But  skeptics claim Johnson's  image is  deeply marred
by  impression  that  he's  irritable,  oversensitive,  politi-
cally  unprincipled.   They  feel  only  an  end  to  the  Viet-
nam  war  could  offset  the  ill   effects."
—Washington  Wire:  Wall  Street Journal, Nov. 18.
What  The  "Bugs"  Are  Hearing
If  the  FBI  is  bugging  Washington   conversation  about  the
sudden  turn  taken  in  the  Fred  Black  tax  case,  both  Lyndon
Johnson's  and  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  ears  must  be  burning.    No
one  knows the  full  extent  to  which  the  FBI  and  other  govern-
ment  snoopers  listen  in  on  private conversation.   What  makes
people  here  wonder  is  why,  just  two  weeks  after  the  Supreme
Court  upheld  Black's  conviction  last  May,  Solicitor   General
Marshall  sent  the  Supreme  Court  a  memorandum  admitting
the  FBI  had  overheard  conversations  between  Black  and  his
lawyer.    Since the  government  denies this was known  to  those
of   its  lawyers  who  worked  on  the  prosecution   and  since  no
one  would  have  known  anyway  if  Marshall  had  not  disclosed
it,  why was this  unusual  step  taken ?  Why  the  sudden  passion
for  civil  liberties?    The  effect  was  also  to  undercut  the  case
against  Bobby Baker,  which  is closely  linked  to  that  of  Black's.
Baker  in  turn  is  linked  to  Johnson   whom  he  so  long  served
as  right  hand  man.    The  government   has  already  stipulated
that  it  violated  Bobby  Baker's  constitutional  rights  by  secret
eavesdropping.    If  Hoover  were not  the  capital's  No.  1 sacred
cow,  this  stipulation would  be  enough  for  proceedings  against
1
him.    Title  18,  Sec.  242,  U.S.  Code,  makes  it  a  crime  punish-
able  by  10  years  in  jail  and  $5000  fine  to  conspire  to  injury
any   citizen's  constitutional  rights.     This   extraordinary   turn
may  save  Baker  as  well  as  Black  from  conviction.    The   FBI
is  not  usually  so  ready  to  volunteer   information  that  it  has
been  violating  the  law.   Top  politicians in  both  parties  worked
closely  with  Baker  when  he  was  Secretary  of  the  Senate,  and
may  fear  what  he  might  tell  if  he  faced  the  prospect  of  going
to  jail.   This  is  only  a  pale  version  of  what   Washingtonians
are  saying  in  the  absence  of  a  full  explanation  from  the  Jus-
tice  Department.
Next Week:  The  Final  Instalment  of  Our Anti-Missile  Series
We'll  Be Clod to Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I. P.
Pleas
Nam
Stre<
City
For
(To)
Stre<
City
For
Stone's
ie  renew
>t
the
Na
»t
$5.35
Weekly
(or  enter)
enclosed
$5
.
extra  send
Indicate   if
send
5618   Nebraska
Washington,
a  sub  for   the
Zip......
a  gift
Zin
Ave.,  N.  W.
D.  C.  20015
enclosed   $5:
..........  State....................
sub
I.  F.  Stone's  Th
announcement  u
to:
Sti
e  Hi
nshe
»te.......
nutted
d  n
11/28/66
Fifties
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.     Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except  in  August,  the  last  week   In  December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,   Washington.  .D.  G.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  1.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   35   in   the  U.S.;   J6   in   Canada;    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe:   S20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED