I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966sep19.pdf

============================================================

Lyndon's  Big  Brotherly Election in  Saigon,  Pps.  2-3
Triumph  of  Democracy, Like  the  Charge  of the  Light  Brigade, Theirs Not  to  Reason  Why
"A  voting  official  in  Xuanluc   (where  80  percent  of  those     reporter   he   doubted   that   more  than   20   percent   of   the
registered   voted),   the  capital   of   Longkhahn   Province,  a     villagers   knew   what   they   were   doing.    But   they   were
largely   Catholic   area   50  miles   north   of   Saigon,   told   a     doing  it."
—Ward  Just  from  Saigon in Washington Post, Sept.  IS
L R Stone's  Weekly
VOL.   XIV,  NO.  28
September   19,  1966
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Why  They  Cry  Black  Power
There  is  a  hopeful  side  to  the  riots  and  picketing  in  the
slums.    They  indicate  that  the  poor  are  no  longer  poor  in
spirit.     This   is  the   spark   that  hope   has  kindled,  the   real
achievement  of   the   poverty  program,   the   beginning   of   re-
habilitation.  The  negative  side  is  the  spread  of  race war.  The
Negro,  the  Puerto  Rican  and  the  Mexican-American will  no
longer  wait  humbly  at  the   back   door  of  our   society.     For
them  its  shiny  affirmation   of  equality  is  a  taunt.    Either  we
make  it  real  or  see  our  country  torn  apart.    A  race  is  on  be-
tween   the  constructive  capacity  of  our   society  and   an  ugly
white   backlash  with   Fascist   overtones.     The   crossroads   of
America's  future  is  not  far off.
The  Curse  of  Mankind
Our  country  is  the  last  hope  of  multiracialism.  The  French,
for  all  their  civilizing  gift,  were  unable  to  create  that  multi-
racial  community  Ho  Chi  Minh  was  once  willing   to   enter.
The  British  Commonwealth   is  splitting  up  over  British  un-
willingness  to  art  against  the  dictatorship  of  white  minorities
in  Rhodesia  and  South  Africa.    Racialism  and  tribalism  are
the   curse  of   mankind,  anachronistic  contemporaries   of   the
astronaut.   Where white  supremacy is  gone  forever,  Arab and
Negro  slaughter  each  other  in  the  Sudan;  Malay  and  Chinese
riot   in   Singapore;   tribalism  is  breaking   up   Black  Africa's
most  promising  nation  in   Nigeria.
Racism  here  is  only  another  example  of  a  universal  human
disease.    The  cry  of  "black  power"  is  less  a  program  than  an
incantation   to  deal  with   the  crippling   effects   of  white  su-
premacy.    The   "black"   affirms   a  lost   racial  pride   and   the
"power"  the  virility  of  which  the  Negro  has  been  robbed  by
generations   of  humiliation.    Its  swift  spread   testifies   to  the
deep  feelings  it  satisfies.    It  is  not  practical  politics;  it  is  psy-
chological   therapy.    Stokeley  Carmichael's  burning   explana-
tion  of  it  in  the  Sept.  22  issue  of  The  New   York  Review  is
to  be  read  as  the  poetry  of  despair.    The  United  States  is  not
Mr.   Carmichael's   cherished  model,   Lowndes  County;   there
are  few  other  counties which have its  overwhelming  black  ma-
jority.    And  it  is  typical  New  Left  narodnik  mysticism,  albeit
in  Negro form,  to  call  for  "the  coming  together  of  black  peo-
ple"   to  pick  their  own  representatives  and  at  the  same  time
to  reject   "most   of  the  black  politicians  we  see  around   the
country  today."  Who  picked  Adam  Clayton  Powell,  Harlem's
absentee  political  landlord?
But  rational  argument  will  not  meet  the  appeal  of   "black
Why  the  Pentagon  Is  to  Salvage  Negroes
"Secretary   McNamara's    plan    to   draft   and   train
hundreds  of  thousands  of  young  men  now   unqualified
for  military  service  was  spawned  by  military  necessity,
despite  all  the  hoopla  about  the  war  on  poverty.  The
plan  is   primarily   designed   to   maintain'  an  adequate
manpower  pool—which  has  been  cut  nearly  in  half  by
a  year's  beefed  up  draft  for  the  Viet  Nam  war.    The
reserve  of  men  available  for  military  duty  has  shrank
from  more  than  2,000,000  in  midsummer   1965   to  just
over  1,000,000  as  of  July  31,  1966  .  .  .  Some  30 percent
of  the  McNamara  draftees  will  be  Negroes  as  against
an  average  Negro  draft  rate  of  10  to  11  percent."
—Washington  Sunday  Star,  Sept.  11..
power."    It   affirms   separation   because  it  has  met  rejection.
When  Senators  go out  on  the  golf  links  to  forestall  a  quorum
rather  than  vote  on  "open  occupancy,"  when  hateful  faces  in
the  North  greet  Negro  demonstrators  with  cries  of  "kill  the
jungle  bunnies,"  when  whites  flee  the  cities  as  if  the  Negro
were  some  kind  of  rodent,  how  else  salvage  pride  except  by
counter-rejection?     It  is  the  taking  of  white  supremacy   for
granted  that  is  the   danger,   not   the  cry  of   "black   power,"
which  is  as  pathetic  as  a  locked-out  child's  agony.    Nothing
could  be more  disastrous  than  to  divert  attention  from  the  real
problems   of   our   society   by   setting   off   on   a   witch   hunt
against  SNCC.    In  Atlanta,   as  in  Watts,  trouble  began   not
because  of  SNCC   (see  its  own  account  on  p.  4)   but  because
the  cops  are  trigger-happy    when  dealing  with  blade   men.
Without  extremists  to  prod  us  into  action,  we will not  take
the  giant  steps   required  to  rehabilitate   the  colored   and  the
poor.   The  Negro  still  wants  in;  he  cannot  go  back to  Africa;
his  only  future  is  here.    Not   black  power   or  white  but  a
sense  of  belonging   to  one  human  family  can  alone  save  this
planet.     But  the  time  is  short  before  hate   shuts  the  doors.
The  time  is  coming  when  we  will  regret  the  billions  wasted
in  Vietnam.    The  time  is  coming  when  we  may  regret  the
number  of  Negroes   we  have  trained   there  in  guerrilla  war.
There  is hardly a city where  the Negroes  do not  already  domi-
nate  the  strategic  areas  through  which  the  affluent   commuter
passes  on  his way to  the  inner  core.    SNCCs  hostility  to  the
war  is  not  disloyalty  but  wisdom.    We  cannot  rebuild  that
sense  of  community  so  essential  to  our  beloved   country's   fu-
ture  by  engaging  in  a  white  man's  war  in  Asia while  a  black
man's  revolt  rises  at  home.
1  1  .
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September 19,  lift
A  Military  Junta  Rigs  An  Election  Plain  Enough  for All to  See ...
The  military junta  which  rules  South  Vietnam  promised  to
suspend   censorship   and   allow   freedom   of  the  press   during
the   15-day   election   campaign   for   a  Constituent   Assembly.
That  promise  was not  kept.    How  do you have a  free  election
without  a  free  press?    I  have  yet  to  see  a  single  editorial  in
any  of  the  major  Eastern  seaboard  newspapers  I  read  which
even  mentioned,  much   less  protested,   this   broken   promise.
I  found  only  three  U.S.  correspondents  who  mentioned  the
fact,  though  even  then  only  in  passing.*
Saigon's  Editors  Had  An  Excuse
The   South  Vietnamese  press   could  plead  that   it  did  not
tell  the  truth  because  it  was  censored;  I  saw  blank  spots  on
page  1  of  the  Saigon  Post  which  attested   efforts   to  report
what  the  censor  would   not  permit.    The  U.S.  press  had  no
such  excuse  for  the  mass  exercise  in  brain-washing  in  which
it   so  enthusiastically  engaged.    Though  a  careful   study  of
the  papers  (see  samples  below),  enabled  any  intelligent   read-
er  to  see the  truth,  the  dispatches  themselves  did  their  best  to
bury  it  in  a  mass  of  speculative  sophistry  designed  to  confuse
the  unwary.  The  editorial  writers  and  the  commentators,  with
some  few  exceptions,  outdid  themselves  in  solemn   mendacity.
An  election  in  which  the  military  junta  decided  who  could
run,  what  he  could   say,  and  how  long  and  where  he  could
Is  That  Constitution  Already  Written?
Last  June  13  we  reported  that  Prof.  John  P.  Roche
was  in  Saigon  where  he  had  been  sent  by  Johnson   (as
the Washington  Post confirmed  in White House sources)
to  help  the  South  Vietnamese  write  their  new   Consti-
tution.   He  is   now  back  to  start  work  at  the   White
House  as  replacement  for  Prof.  Eric  F.  Goldman, LBJ's
disillusioned  Gauleiter  for  the  intellectuals.   The  Wash-
ington  Star  Sept.  9  said  Roche  "went  to  Vietnam  for
the  President   to  examine  that  country's  constitutional
structure."  But the  Assembly  which is  supposed  to  give
South  Vietnam a  constitutional  structure  to  replace  its
military  dictatorship  has  not  yet  begun its  work.  What,
and  with  whom,  was  Prof.  Roche studying?   Under  the
rules  established  by  the  military  Junta,  it  can  substi-
tute  its  own  draft  for  any  Constitution  the  Assembly
produces.    The   Assembly   can   overrule   the    military
only  by  a  two-thirds  vote  "in  open  ballot."    (Wall  St.
Journal,  Aug.  26).   Now  the   London  Observer's  man
in  Saigon,  Mark  Frankland,  reports  (Sept.  11)  that  Ky
has  "made it  embarrassingly  clear  in  the  test  few  days"
what   kind  of   Constitution  he   wants   and  adds   in   a
parenthesis,  "the  draft  already  exists."   Is  that  what
Roche  did  in  Saigon?    Has  South  Vietnam's   new  Con-
stitution  already  been  written  for  it  in  advance  by  a
Founding    Father    Lyndon   Johnson    so   thoughtfully
supplied?
'Ralph  H.  Kennan,  Baltimore  Sun,  Sept.  5,  reported  that
candidates  were  complaining  of   press   censorship.    Charles
Mohr,  New  York  Times,  Sept.  10,  wrote  "Buddhist  attempts
to  disrupt  the  election   are  hampered  by  an  increase  in  the
stringency  of  press  censorship,"  a  prime  example  of  propa-
gandistic  phraseology.   Richard  Critchfield,  Washington  Star,
Sept.  11,  reported,  "The  promised  lifting  of  press  censorship
never  really  materialized."
talk  was  hailed  by  David  Lawrence  (Sept.  13)   "as  a  unique
expression   of  a  free  people  in  exercising  their  right  of  self-
determination."    Unique,   it  certainly  was.    A  campaign   in
which  neither  the  war  nor  the  inflation nor  military rule  could
be  discussed  was called  by the  Washington  Post  (Sept.  13)   "a
vindication  of  the  political   awareness  of  the  f ank-and-file  of
the  people."     Under   a  vigilant   dictatorship   the  man  who
Some  Insights  from  the  Saigon Dispatches Into The  Realities  of  That  Election
"Most  ordinary  Vietnamese  assume  they  had better  vote  to
'avoid  trouble'  in  future  official  dealings."
—Richard  Critchfield   in  Washington  Star, Sept.  3
"There  still  can  be  no criticism  of  the  regime—at  least  not
directly.    How  can  a  candidate  campaign?"
—An  unnamed  "veteran  of  Vietnamese  polities"  quoted  by
Ralph  H.  Kennan  in  the  Baltimore   Sun,  Sept.  5.
"There  is  no  evidence, and  likely  to  be  none,  that  the  cam-
paign  will  generate  a  true  national  debate  over  the  conduct
and  duration  of  the  war.  The  time  period  is  too  short,  the
interest   in   the   election   too   shallow,   the   restrictions    both
real  and  psychological,  too  many."
—Ward  Just- in  Washington  Post,  Sept.  4
"In  the  2d  Military  Corps  area,  commanded by  Gen.  Vinh
Luc,  a  recent  directive  instructed  local  police,  army   officers
and  other  functionaries  to  take opponents of  the  election  into
custody.   The  directive  also  recommended  the   initiation   of
a   whispering   campaign  designed  to  spread  the   word   that
non-voters  could  find  themselves in  trouble."
—Stanley  Karnow  in  Washington  Post,  Sept. 11
"The   formal   opening  of   Saigon's   constituent   assembly
election  campaign  was  postponed  tonight.   The  officially  an-
nounced  reason  was  rain.  The  real  reason  was  voter apathy.
Perhaps  a  half  dozen voters  showed  up ...     'There  simply  is
no  interest,'  a  candidate said."
—Ralph  H.  Kennan  in  Baltimore  Sun,  Aug.  29
"In  two   weeks  of   campaigning,  the  candidates  have  not
discussed  the  war,  how  to  win  it  or  how  to  negotiate   its
end  .  .  .  More  than  a  few  hundred  people  seldom  show  up  at
a  meeting and often  almost  no  one  shows  up."
—Charles Mohr from  Saigon  in  New York  Times, Sept. 8
Nothing  So  Reconciles  Us  to  Democracy  As
Having A Military  Dictatorship to Fall  Back On
"Some  elderly  and respected  Southern  politicians now
openly  tell  American  newsmen  they  favor  some  sort
of  negotiated   settlement  with  Southerners   among  the
Vietcong,  something  almost  unthinkable a  year  ago."
—Alarmed  dispatch  from  Saigon,  Wash  Star, Sept.  11
"This  election  could  lead  to  a  government  determined
to  end  the  war  through  negotiations  and  to  'invite  the
Americans  out',  which  is  why  the  idea  of  holding  elec-
tions   originally   caused   shudders   at   the   American
Embassy.   This  possibility,  however,  seems   extremely
remote.   This  is  true  if  only  because  any  government
flirting  with  neutralist  tendencies  would  know  that   it
was  risking  an almost certain coup d'etat  by the  Army."
—Chas. Mohr from  Saigon,  New York  Times,  Sept.  11
"I  do  not  care  who  is  Premier,"  the  fisherman  said  with
obvious  inner  enjoyment.  "I  have  no  mind  about  Saigon.   If
the  Premier wants  me  to  vote,  okay.   I  will  do  my  duty  and
go  voting.   One hears  those  who  do  not  vote  may  be  menaced
by  the  police."
—Interview  by  Critchfield   from  Tuyen  Due  in  the  Mekong
delta,  Washington  Star,  September  7.
"Literature,   both  content   and  amount,  is   controlled—as
much  to  control  uniformity  of  spending as  for  censorship."
—Ward  Just  in  Washington  Post,  Aug.  27
"There  are  no  real  issues  in  this  election."
—Robert  Keatley  m the Wall  Street Journal, Aug. 87
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  September  19, 1966
. . . and the  American  Press  Hails  It  As A Triumph  of Democracy!
wrote  those  words  would  be  arrested  on  a  charge  of  poking
fun  at  the government.
A  Helpless  Herd
There  never  has  been  a  more  expertly  rigged   affair.    By
forbidding  party  slates,  the  military   (and   the  CIA  election
experts  we  no  doubt  lend-leased  them)   made  sure  that  the
Assembly  would  be   an   unorganized   mass,   easy  to   control.
The  main  fall-back  lies  in  the  rules  which will  allow  the  mili-
tary  to  substitute  their  own  draft   for   any  Constitution   the
Assembly  writes.   Yet  even  the  New   York  Times,  which  has
been  so  admirably critical,  collapsed  into  wide-eyed imbecility
and  said  (Sept.  13)  the  Saigon  junta  "now  has  an  enhanced
and  legitimate  status  of  its  own  as  a  national  entity."    That
must  have  been  written  way out  yonder  on  one  of  those  LSD
sugar   cubes.
No  one  questioned  the  junta's  figures  on  how  many  regis-
tered  voters  voted.    No  one  asked  how  reliable  such  figures
could  be  where  there  were  no  opposition  watchers,  where  the
military  and  the  provincial  chiefs  were  free  to  report  any fig-
ures  they  pleased.    Hardly  an  election  passes  in  this  country
without  some  charges  of  fraudulent  count,  but  the  tally  from
Saigon  was  swallowed  without  a  gulp.
Postscript  to  Last  Week's  Issue
"Any   thoroughgoing  Senate   inquiry  into   the  Thai-
land  situation   must  ask  how  so  clever  and  sweeping
a  resolution  as  the  Tonkin  Bay  resolution   came  to  be
trotted  out so  swiftly ...  It  would  be  interesting  to
know  whether  the  resolution  had  actually  been  drafted
before  the  events  in  Tonkin  Bay."
—Our  issue   last   week  on  The   Hidden   History  of
the  Coming  War  on  Thailand.
"Usually,  his  (Johnson's)  timing  is  precisely  his own
—as  when he  presented  his  Vietnam  resolution  to  Con-
gress  the  day  after  the  Gulf  of  Tonkin  crisis.   He  had
been  carrying  it  around in  his  pocket  for  weeks  waiting
for  the  moment."
—Tom  Wicker,  Washington  Bureau   chief,   the  New
York  Times  in  an  Esquire  article  on LBJ,  Nov.  1965.
A   wary   White   House   played   it   cool    for    two   days,
perhaps  unable  to  believe  the  press  would   prove  so  exuber-
antly  gullible.   Then  Johnson  topped  the  chorus  by  declaring
the  Vietnamese  elections   "gave  us  a  lasting  lesson  in  democ-
racy."     (Wash.  Post,  Sept.  14).     We  hope  Johnson  wasn't
serious.    We'd   hate  to  think  of  what  our  own  elections  could
become  if  he  started  taking  lessons  from  Ky.
What  Chen  Yi  Actually  Said  to  Visiting  Japanese  Diet  Members  in  Peking
Because   of   their   importance   and   because   certain   key
phrases   here   emphasized   have   been  omitted   or  glossed
over  in   J7.S.  reporting,  we  thought  readers  would  like  to
see  for  themselves  exactly  what  China's  Foreign  Minister
Chen  Yi  told  a  visiting  Liberal-Democratic  party   (i.e.  con-
servative)   delegation  from  Japan  Sept.   6  as  reported  in
Japan.    Chen  Yi  also  stressed  China's  desire  for    peaceful
co-existence  with  Japan  saying,  "We   believe  in  socialism
but  other  countries  should  decide  socialism,  capitalism,  or
revisionism  to  their  own  liking.    We  do  not  like  to  have
ideas  forced   on  us,  and  also  we  do  not  like  to  force   our
ideas  on  others"  (Mainichi,  Sept.   7).
"Q.  There  are  many  people  in  Japan  who fear  a   possible
military   clash   between  the   U.S.   and  China.    We  want   to
improve  relations  between  Peking  and  Washington.    Japan
has  no  intention  of  militarily  attacking  China,  and  we do not
think  that  the  U.§.  would  wage  a  war  with  China.
"A.  We  do  not  think  that  the   U.S.   would   immediately
wage  a  war  with  us, or  that  the  present  Sino-American  ten-
sion   will  last  for  a  long  time.    We  have  no  intention   to
provoke  a  war  with  the  U.S.    If  we  make  such  a   provoca-
tion,  we  would  lose  the  support  of  world  public  opinion,  and
without  the  support  of  world  public  opinion  we  would  never
succeed.    The  answer  to  this  question  is  up  to  the  United
States.
"It   is  wrong  to  consider  that  China  has  no  intention  of
having  talks  with  the  U.S.,  and  the  two  countries  will  con-
tinue  negotiations  at  Warsaw  at  the  ambassadorial   level.   A
settlement  of  questions  through  talks  is  China's  basic policy.
If  this  were  not  true,  the  Warsaw  talks  would  have  been
suspended  long  ago.
"The  solution  of  the  Vietnam  issue  must  be  decided  by  the
Vietnamese  people  and  not  by  China.   A  peace  conference  is
impossible  of  the  present  stage  when the  U.S.  is  using  force.
The  U.S.  said  that  its  military  forces  would  be  increased  to
750,000  by  next   Pall  and  to   1,000,000  by  the   end  of   next
year.    Until  the  U.S.  forces  withdraw  from  Vietnam,  nego-
tiations  are   impossible.    If   the   U.S.   withdraws,   the  issue
could  be  settled  by  the  Vietnamese  themselves.
"The   main  aim   of   the  present   cultural  revolution  is   to
8  *                                                                                                    11
Chen  Yi  on  Tokyo  TV
"I   do  not   think   that   the   present   tense   situation
between  the  U.S.  and  China  will  last  forever.   But  the
problem  lies  in  the  attitude  of  the  United  States.   If
the  U.S.  should  invade  China,  China  would  rise  up  to
defend   itself.    CHINA  SUPPORTS   THE   IDEA   OF
SINO-U.S.  TALKS ON  THE  SETTLEMENT  OF  THE
VIETNAM  DISPUTE.
"The  activities  of  the  Red Guards  are  correct  .  .  .
THE   CULTURAL   REVOLUTION   IS   BEING  CAR-
RIED   OUT   TO   STRENGTHEN   THE   DOMESTIC
CHINESE  SYSTEM  IN   PREPARATION  FOR  THE
POSSIBILITY    OF    U.S.    AGGRESSION  AGAINST
CHINA."                                       —On  Tokyo  TV  Sept.  6
consolidate   the  domestic  structure   in   preparation   for   the
worst  situation.   China  does  not  think  that  a  Sino-American
conflict  will  eventually  take  place.    China  has  no  intention
to  wage  war  with  the  U.S.  because  China  does  not  consider
that  the  U.S.  would  stage  a  war  with   China.
"It  is  impossible  to  say  that  the  worst  situation  will  not
happen.   In  preparation  for  such  a  case,  China  must  solidify
its  domestic  structure  to  prevent  the  appearance  of  another
Wang  Chac-ming  who  betrayed   China  to  Japan.
"The  second  aim  is  to  prevent  a  tendency  in  which  revi-
sionism  is  born  and  leads  to  capitalism,  as  is  seen  in  the
Soviet  Union, Yugoslavia  and  some  East  European  countries.
In  order  to  prevent  such  a  tendency,  a  new culture  must  be
created   by  increasing  production  and  improving  techniques.
This  is  the  cultural  revolution   and  there  is  a  long  way  to
go  before   achieving   that.    The  present  movements   by  the
Red  Guards  are  correct.    This  does  not  mean  however  that
every  demand  by  the  Red  Guards  will  be  taken  up  as  a  na-
tional  policy. The government  has a right to  decide  its  policy.
China's  foreign   policy  will  not   be  changed  by  the   cultural
revolution."
—"Gist  of  the  questions  and  answers"  in  Chinese  Foreign
Minister   Chen   Yi's   talk  Sept.   6  with 'Japanese   parliamen-
tarians  as  printed  next  day  in  the  Tokyo  daily  Mainichi.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  September  19,  1966
SNCCs  Version  of What  Sparked  The  Racial  Outbreaks  in  Atlanta
We   thought   our   readers   would   like   to   see  SNCC's   version  of
what  sparked  the  Atlanta   riot!.    Marion  Barry   of   SNCC's   Wash-
ington   office    gave  the  following   account  to  the   press  Sept.  8   on
his  return  from  Atlanta  where  he  was  attending  a  SNCC   workshop
when  the  first  outbreak  occurred  Sept.  6:
At  approximately  1:15   p.m.   two  white  policemen   stopped   a  car
driven  by  Harold   Prather,  a  25-year  old  Negro,  who   lived  %  of  a
block  away.   The  cops  stopped  Prather  at  Capitol  avenue  and  Ormond
st.     According   to   15  or   20   persons   who   witnessed   the   incident,
Prather   jumped   from   the  car  and   ran   and  was  shot   three   times  by
one  of  the  white  officers.    "Prather  kept  moving  at  a  very  slow  speed
and  was fired upon  again  as he  tried  to  get  to  his  home ^  of  a  block
away,"  said  one  witness.    He  finally  made  it  and  fell  on  the   porch.
Immediately   after   the   shooting,   a   crowd   of   150  to   200   persons
gathered   at  Prather's  house  to  protest  the  shooting.    There  were  no
SNCC   people  present.    Stokeley  Carmichael,  SNCC  chairman,  return-
ing  from   a  radio  interview  heard  about  the  incident  over  the   radio
and  went  to  the  scene.    The  people  there  were  very  angry.    The  local
people  wanted  Carmichael  to  come  back  and  help  organize  a  peace-
ful   protest  demonstration.    It  was  called  for   4  p.m.
Witnesses  Asked  to  Speak
At  approximately  3:30  p.m.  two  SNCC   people  arrived  at   Capitol
Ave.  and   Ormond   St.,  the   scene   of   the   demonstration;   200   people
were  there.    The   local  people   had  made  their  own  signs  and  gone
around   in  the   various  neighborhoods  informing  their   friends  as   to
what  had  happened.    At  3:45  p.m.   Bill  Ware,  project  director   for
SNCC's  Atlanta  Project,  and  three  other   SNCC   people   arrived  with
a   sound  truck.    Ware   asked   the   assembled  people   what   had   hap-
pened  and  they  began  to  tell  him.   Ware  said  the  whole  group  should
know  what  had  happened  and  asked  if  witnesses would  tell  about  the
incident  over  the  purjlic  address  system.
Several  persons  began  telling  what  they  had   seen.     Police   officers
immediately  moved  in  and   told   Ware   to  turn  off   the   P.A.   system.
Ware  informed  the   policemen  that  he  wanted  to   stop  rumors  and
make  sure  that  everyone  knew  what  had  happened.    The   policemen
immediately  arrested  Ware.    Another  SNCC  worker  asked  if   people
still  wanted  to  talk.    The  local  people  said  "yes."    The  talking  con-
tinued  and  police  arrested  the  SNCC   person.    This  made  the  crowd
angrier.     They  demanded  that  police   release   the  two  SNCC   people.
The  local  people  said  that  they  would  sit  in  the  streets  until  the  two
persons  were  released  and  the  Mayor  suspended  the  policeman  who
shot  Prather.
The  policemen tried  to  remove  people  and  arrested  some  who  lived
in  the  neighborhood.    The  arrests  were  immediately  protested  by  the
crowd,   but   to   no   avail.     The   people  really  got   angry   and   started
pushing  some  oi  the  officers  and  several bottles  were  thrown.    Mayor
Ivan  Allen ani\ed  on  the  scene  and  brought  with  him  150-200  white
policemen   and   an   armored  truck   loaded  with  white   cops,   machine
guns  and  other  riot   equipment.    White   officers   with  shotguns   were
stationed  all  alon^  ilie  street.
At  that  time  Mayor  Allen  tried  to  lead  the  crowd  to  the  Atlanta
stadium  some  4  or  5  blocks  away.    The  crowd  refused  to  leave  their
neighborhood.     The  crowd  was  also  angry  because  all  of  the  white
officers   had  machine  guns  and  shotguns,   but   the  Negro  officers   had
only  their  pistols.    This  really  set  the  crowd  off.    Bottles,  bricks  and
other  objects   were  thrown  at  the  white   officers.
What  the  Protesters  Wanted
Allen  tried  to  talk  to  the  people  from   atop  a  police  car  but  they
would  not  listen   because  the  crowd  wanted  one  of  their   leaders   to
talk  and  not   Allen.    The   block  leader   who  got   on  top   of   the  car
demanded   that   1)   white   cops  get  out   of   there   with   machine  guns
and  shotguns,   2)   the   release  of   all   those   illegally   and   unjustly   ar-
rested,  and  3)   the  cops  be  fired  who  shot   the  young  Negro.    The
crowd  cheered  the  demands  but  Allen  refused  to  answer.    He   refused
to  address  himself  to  their  grievances,  at  which  time  he  was  toppled
from  the  police  car.    Then  50  to  60  cops  rushed  into  the  crowd  and
started  hitting  and  pushing  people.    Mayor  Allen  then  directed  that
tear  gas  be  used  to  disperse  the  1500  people  who  were  on  the  scene.
"Tear  gas  them  or  tear  those  houses  down,"  Allen  shouted.
All   400   to   500   officers   began   firing   their   pistols   and   shotguns
without  warning,  both  in  the  air  and  at  the  crowd.    It  was  a  terrify-
ing   experience.     Unarmed   people   were   assaulted   by   officers   armed
with  tear  gas,   pistols,   machine  guns  and  shotguns.    Never  seen  any-
thing  like  it.    Little  kids,  7  or  8  years  old  were  hit  with   tear  gas
cannisters.    Black  women  were  clubbed  to  the  ground.    Anyone  who
was  not   moving  fast   enough  was  immediately  arrested   and   thrown
head  first  in  the  paddy  wagon.    Cops  fired  tear  gas indiscriminately
into  the   homes  of   Black  people  who   were   not   even   on   the   street.
Little  kids  came  out  gasping  for  air.    Cops  went  onto  Black  people's
porches  to  beat  and  arrest  them.    During  this  period,   several   police
cars  were  stoned,  and  several  policemen  were  injured.   During  all  of
this,  the  attack  was  directed  by  Mayor  Ivan  Allen.    He  ordered  little
kids   tear-gassed.    He   ordered   white   cops   to   beat   and   arrest  black
people.
SNCC's  Role  in  the  Outbreak
Now  as  to  SNCC's  role:  1)   SNCC  has  only  one  project  in  Atlanta
and  that  is  in  an  area  called  Vine  City  which  is  on  the  other   side
of  the  town  from  the  disorders.    2)   SNCC  has  never  worked  in  the
neighborhood  where  the  disorders  took  place.    3)   It  was  the  shooting
of   the   young  Negro   by  the   white   cops,   then   subsequent  arrests  of
SNCC   people  that  made  people   angry.    4)   The   local   people  them-
selves  made  the   signs   and  got   their  friends   together.      5)   Stokeley
Carmichael   drove   through   the   area  only   after   the   disorders   began.
6)   Most  of  the   SNCC   people  arrived  on  the  scene  after   the   crowd
had  gathered  and  police  were  beating  people.    7)   The  focus  should
be  on  Mayor  Allen  and  his  racist  cops  and  not  SNCC.    At   11  a.m.
that  day  SNCC  members  had  gone  to  the  Mayor's  office  with  a  com-
plaint  concerning  police  officials.     At  this  time  Mayor  Allen   refused
to  speak  with  the  group  and  dismissed  them  by  stating,  "You're  out
of   line  in  Atlanta  which  is  known  for   its  fair   and  equal   treatment
of   all   citizens."
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue Io  Your  Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes—
Why   Not  Send  a  Gift  Sub to  That  Boy or  Girl  Starting   College?
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Street    ..................................
City  .......................................
For  the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name  ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
....  Zip..........State......................
9/19/66
a  gift  sub  to:
City  ............................................  Zip..........State......................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted   Fifties
Indicate   if   announcement   wished  D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December  and   th*
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly   published  and   edited
by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.;    W  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Hall   rates:
SIS  to  Europe;   120  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED