I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966jul11.pdf

============================================================

Our  Now  You  See Them,  Now  You  Don't, Peace Initiatives, P.  4
Only  Two  Weeks Before  We  Bombed The  Oil  Depots  of   Hanoi  and  Haiphong
"On  June   17  educators  attending  a   State   Department
background   briefing   were   told   that   few   military   targets
remained  in  North  Vietnam   that   were  not  already  being
hit,   and  that  the   United  States   had  no  interest  in  per-
sistent  attacks  on  built-up  populated  areas.    U.S.   officials
said  relatively  few  tons  a  day  of  supplies  were  going  from
the  north  into  South  Vietnam,  and  were  being  carried  by
coolies  or  bicycles  or  moved  at  night  in  a  manner  defying
air interdiction."
—AP  from  Wash, m  York,  Pa.  Gazette- & Daily  June SO.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL  XIV, NO.  24
JULY  11,  1966""       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Where  Johnson's  New  Bombings  Lead
Easy,  wrote  Virgil,  in  a  passage  every  schoolboy  once  knew,
is  the  descent  to  hell.   And  to  the  moral  standards  of   the
damned.  This  is the  path  down  which Lyndon Baines  Johnson
is   leading   our   country.    His   is  a   Satanic   cleverness    John
Foster  Dulles  would  have  envied.   Everything becomes  trans-
muted  in  Johnson's  hands  until  we  lose  the  capacity  to  dis-
tinguish  good  from  evil.   So  in  his  TV-cast  press  conference
last  night  from  his  opulent  ranch  in  Texas  he  somehow  man-
aged  to  appear  the  aggrieved  victim, the  unjust  target,  in  the
bombing  of  the  oil  depots  in  Hanoi  and  Haiphong.
All  Criticism   Communist?
Over  and  over  again  the  President  identified  criticism  with
Communism.    Some   of   the   Communist   countries,   he   said,
"were  rather  vicious  in  their  statements  .  .  .  that  we  were
bombing  civilian targets."   Perhaps  they  were  only  premature.
"Most  of   the  Communist  countries   expressed   disapproval,"
he   said.    (So,   for   that   matter,  did   most  of   the   non-Com-
munist.)    "We   expected   the  regular  Communist   response,"
he  said  in  another  passage,   "namely,  that  this  would  harden
the  opposition,   that  it  would  not  lead  to  negotiations   .  .  ."
The   unwary  listener   would   never   guess   that   this   is  over-
whelmingly  world  opinion,  that  it  is  the  view  of  the  Vatican,
of   the  Japanese,   Canadian  and   Indian   governments,   of   the
Secretary  General  of  the  United  Nations,  of  every West  Euro-
pean  government,  except  perhaps  West  Germany's; that  almost
every  small  country  in  Latin  America,  Africa  and  Asia  looks
on  in  horror  as  the  world's  largest  military  power  is  allowed
to  burn  and  bomb  at  will  a  country  too  small  and  weak  to
retaliate  in  kind.   Johnson   could   point   for  support   only  to
those  countries  "who,"  as  he  elegantly  put  it,  "have  bodies
there,"  i.e.  in  South  Vietnam,  bodies  we  pay  for  in  the  case
of  the  only  large  supplier,  which  is  South  Korea.
If  enemy  planes  suddenly  appeared  in  the  skies  over  New
York  or  Washington   and  began  to  bomb  the  oil  depots  on
their  outskirts,  if  they  returned  three  days  in  a  row  and  we
had  no  way of  knowing  whether  this  time  or  next  they  would
hit  the  center  of  the  city,  if  it  became  dangerous  to  venture
out  into  the  streets  as  the  skies  rained  hot  and  deadly  frag-
ments  of  shrapnel  from  the  anti-aircraft  guns  with  which  we
tried  vainly to  ward  off  the  invaders,  we  too  might  be  just  a
little   "vicious",   as  Johnson   complained,   in   our   comments.
Johnson  explained  self-approvingly  that  we  "were  very  careful
to  select  military  targets  that  were  not  in  the  center  of  the
Beware  the  Cooing  of  This  Dove
"He  [the   President]  sees  the  future  as   an  era  of
reconciliation."
—Washington   correspondent,   The   Times   (London)
June   18  on  the   basis  of   a  White  House  briefing    for
leading  European  newsmen  two  nights   before   Johnson
announced  he  was  going  to  escalate  the  war.
"Indeed  it  is  said  that  in  his  reflective  moments  the
President  looks  beyond  this  war  to  a  period  of  peace
unprecedented  in  this  century."
—Chalmers  Roberts  in  Washington  Post  July  3  fresh
from   a   White   House   briefing   .after    the   oil  storage
tanks   in   the   suburbs   of   Hanoi  and   Haiphong   were
bombed.
"There  are  things  that,  as  we  look   at   them   from
Vietnam,   happen   with  the   regularity   of   clockwork:
Every  time  L.  B.  Johnson  is   about   to   intensify   his
armed  aggression,  he  talks  about his  search  for  peace."
—July    4   appeal    to   UJ5.   mothers   by   North   Viet-
namese  women  intellectuals,  Hanoi  radio, June  28.
area, and to spare  all civilians . .  ."  But even  God,  with  whom
our  leaders  sometimes  seem  to  confuse  themselves,  could   not
be  that  precise  if  He  hurled  down  the  lightning  of  His  judg-
ment.   Maps  published  by the  London  Sunday  Times  (July  3)
show  clusters  of  houses  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of   the
oil   depots   in  Hanoi   and   Haiphong   and  built-up  suburban
areas  within  a  mile.   No  doubt  the  Air  Force  tried  for  preci-
sion  and  largely  succeeded,  but  how  were  the  poor  people  on
the  ground  to  know  this,  and  who  were  we  to  decide  in  our
omnipotence  how  far  we  were  to  go  in  punishing  and  fright-
ening  them,  like  some  giant  tormenting  an  ant-hill  with  huge
and  clumsy  foot?
Eye-Witness  In  Hanoi
The  fear  which  seized  Hanoi  was  vividly  described  by  Jean
Raffaelli,   the  Agence  France-Presse  man  in  the  North  Viet-
namese  capital.    "The   noise  of  the  bombers,"  he  reported  in
a  cable  to  that  same  issue  of  the  London  Sunday  Times,   "the
explosions   and   anti-aircraft   fire   reached   such   an   intensity
that   suddenly  it  brought   an  element   of   fear.   People   took
refuge   in  the   shelters,  or  jumped   into  the   trenches   which
zigzag  across private  gardens.   Shrapnel  rained  down  upon  the
(Continued  on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's Weekly, July  11,1966
(Continued  from  Page  One)
pavements,  injuring   dozens  of  people  .  .  .  Accounts  which
were  forthcoming  in  the  evening  suggest  that  the  taids  were
precision   jobs,  with   the   bombs  well  grouped.    It   was  not
possible  to  assess  the  casualties,  but  the  coming  and  going  of
ambulances,  and  the  bustle  at  the  principal   hospital   .  .  .
suggested   that  they  had  been  relatively  heavy."    Washington
officials  quickly hailed  the  bombings  as  "superb"  but  assured
us  that  they  had  killed  only  "one   or  two  civilians,  if   any,"
though  admitting  heavy smoke hampered  reconnaissance   (New
York   Times,   July  3).   This   smug  arithmetic   of   the  body-
count  is  always  being  adjusted  upward  or  downward,  as  if
with   omniscient   exactness,   to   prove   our   prowess   or   our
rectitude.
What  the  Nazis  Did in  Holland
Hanoi  is  taking  no  chances  on  our  highly  advertised  mercy.
Strict  evacuation  orders  have  been  issued   and  the  capital  is
being  emptied  as  rapidly  as  possible  of  all  those  not  engaged
in  essential  tasks;  the  population   is  expected   to  be  reduced
from   1,200,000   to  300,000.   It  is  rapidly  becoming  a  ghost
town.   The  authorities  fear  not  only  the  bombardment   of  the
city  and   the  demoralization  of   its  inhabitants,  M.   Raffaelli
reported  from  Hanoi  on  the  Agence  France-Presse  ticker  July
2,  but  also  the  possibility that  the  American  fliers  may hit  the
dikes  which  protect  the  populous  Red  River  Valley  and  its
rice-fields   from   inundation.   Heavy   rains   in   Yunnan   have
already  swollen  the  river  beyond  normal.   Parts  of  Hanoi  are
below  the  level  of  the  waters  held  back  by  the  dikes.   These
are   constantly   patrolled    and   improved    by   special   teams.
Destruction  of  the  dikes,  especially  now  as  the  waters  rise,
could   drown   and   starve  out   a   substantial  portion   of   the
North's  most  heavily  populated   area.   Hanoi   fears  that  we
may  duplicate  in  North  Vietnam  the  war  crime  the  Germans
committed   by  bombing  the  dikes  in  Holland.    This  is  the
fear   aroused  as  we  tighten  the  screws  on  North  Vietnam's
people  and  intensify  the  terror  in  what  Johnson  blandly calls
"a  policy  of  measured  response."
Plain  words  are  disappearing  from  circulation  as  the  gov-
ernment  floods  us  with  counterfeit  phrases  of  this  kind.   The
real  word  for  the  policy  we  are  following  is  that   "schreck-
lichkeit,"  that  frightfulness,   the  Germans  proclaimed  as  their
strategy  in  World  War  I,  also  as  a  means  of  shortening  the
war  by  frightening  their  enemies  the  more  quickly  into  sub-
mission.   I  can  remember  as  a  boy  the  contempt  the  Germans
aroused  as  a  people  who  could  so  openly  proclaim  so  devilish
Add  Johnson's Fairy  Tales
'The  North Vietnamese are  trying  to  deny  the  people
of  South  Vietnam  the  right  to  build  their  own nation,
the  right to choose  their own system of  government .. .
and  South Vietnam  has  asked  us  for  help."
—Johnson  at  Omaha, June SO.
"A   limited  survey  of   popular   attitudes   in   govern-
ment  controlled areas  of  South  Vietnam  indicates peo-
ple  there  tend  to  regard  the  war  as  an  American  one."
—Associated  Press in Washington  Star, June  27.
"Premier  Ky  and  other  junta  leaders  appear  to  be
growing  less  and  less  hesitant  about  resorting  to  au-
thoritarian   measures   .   .  .  now  that   the   [Buddhist]
crisis  has  ended."
—Neil  Sheehan from  Saigon,  New York  Times July  S.
a  tactic.  We  are  more  clever  than  they,  and  portray  a massive
rain   of   fire   from   the   skies  as  • somehow  the   token   of   our
benevolence.
It  is  only  as  terror  and  economic  warfare  designed  to  bring
all  Vietnam  to  its  knees  on  our  terms  at  the  bargaining  table
that   the   escalation   can   be   rationalized.    Pentagon    sources
eager  for  new  and  more  deadly  targets  are  already  leaking  the
truth  about  the  oil  depot  raids.   Richard  Fryklund,  a  military
affairs  reporter  with  good  sources  in  the  Air  Force,  reported
in  the  Washington  Star  (June. 30)  that  despite  the  raids  the
infiltration   of  North  Vietnamese   regiments   was  expected   to
increase,  as  it  has  since  the  bombings  of  the  North  began  in
February  of  last  year.   He  reported  that  the  enemy  has  been
stockpiling  more  supplies  than  they  had  been  using  and  that
"the   enemy  would   require  delivery  of   about   150   tons   of
material  a  day  if   they  went  on  the   offensive"   and   "at   the
present  modest  tempo  of  the  war"  need  only  about  90  tons.
That  is  nine  10-ton  truck-loads  a  day,  not  much  for  a  little
country   McNamara's   computers   credit  with   10,000   trucks.
Oil  can  be  found  for  that  trickle  no  matter  how  much  we
bomb.   As  recently  as  Jan.  21,  as  Senator  Fulbright  recalled
at  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  hearing  June  30,
McNamara  said  the  amount  of  fuel  necessary  for  their  supply
trucks  could  be  found  even  though  we  were  to  shut  off  the
supply  by mining  Haiphong.    He  added  "even  if  they  got  no
fuel  for  trucks,  they  have  demonstrated  many, many  times  in
the  Orient  that  they  can  move  the  quantities  of  supplies  now
being  moved  into  the  south  by  animal  and  manpower."    The
secret  of  these  raids,  which  McNamara  repeatedly  opposed   in
private  talks  with   reporters   at  Honolulu   and   since,   lies  in
Two  Freudian  Slips  Which  Revealed  the  Real  Nature of  Our  Vietnamese  War Policy
Under   Secretary   of  State  BALL:  What   we  have  said,
and it  may  be  that  the  unconditional  surrender  [sic]   formu-
lation  is  subject  to  some  misunderstanding, but  what  that
is  intended  to  do  is  to  represent the  most flexible approach
by  the  U.S.  possible  to  sitting  down  and talking.  .  .  .
MR.  BALL:  I  am  just  advised  I  used  the  words  "uncon-
ditional   surrender"  instead  of   "unconditional  discussions."
It  was  a  mere  slip  of  the tongue.
SEN.  CHURCH:  Not  a  Freudian  slip?   [Laughter].
MR.  BALL:  Not  in  the least.
»                 *                *
SEN.  GORE:  What  troubles  me  is  the  notion of  this Ad-
ministration  that  punishment  is  persuasive. .  .  .
MR.   BALL:  We  are   not   thinking   of   this   in  terms  of
punishment.  .  .  .  Punishment  would  mean we  would  say  to
North  Vietnam,  "You  either  surrender   [sic]   tomorrow  or
you  are  all  going  to  be  killed,  your  cities  are  going  to  be
decimated,  your  country  is  going to be turned into a  desert."
We  do  not  say  that.    What  we  say  to  them  is,  "You sur-
render  [sic]   tomorrow  because  at  the  end  of  the  road  you
are  not  going  to  win  this  war  militarily  or  politically.   You
surrender  [sic]  tomorrow  because if  you  do  not  do that  you
are  going  to  have  to  consume more  and  more  of  your  re-
sources  in a  war  which  is  a  fruitless  one  from  your  point  of
view  and  therefore  there  is  nothing  in  it  for  you."   That
is  a  different  thing  from  punishment.  .  . .
MR.  BALL:  I  said a  moment  ago,  I  used the  phrase "sur-
render  tomorrow."    I  did  not  intend  it  that  way.   I  mean
stop  aggression  tomorrow. ...
—Senate  Foreiyn  Relations  Committee  hearing  June  30.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  11,1966
domestic  political  considerations.  Johnson  hopes  to  make  up
for   the   falling   confidence   in   him   within   the   ranks  of   the
Democratic  and   the  peace-minded  by  winning  the   "hawks"
and  the  Republicans.   He  is  shaping  up  as  their  ideal  candi-
date  for   1968,   since  he  has  succeeded  in  doing  what   Nixon
unsuccessfully   advocated   in   1954   and   Goldwater   in    1964.
When   Johnson  speaks  of  keeping  one's  word,  as  he  did  at
Omaha,  one  remembers  all  those  words  he  has  brushed  under
the  rug  since  he  won  the  last  election   by  promising  so  fer-
vently  not  to  do  what he  is  doing.
The  Language  of  One-Man Rule
Slowly  and  gradually Johnson  has  set  us  on  a  course  whose
end  neither  he  nor  anyone  else  can  foresee.    He  is  reported
to  be  in  a  Messianic  mood,  seeing  himself  as  the  misunder-
stood  leader  of  a  holy  crusade.   He   is  surrounded  by  hawks
and  hardliners,  and  by  comparison  with  them  can  still  believe
himself  moderate.   Always  super-sensitive to  criticism, he  now
begins  to  see  it  as  treasonable.   If  the  enemy  can  only  win  on
our  home  front,  as he  now  proclaims,  like  the  French  rightists
before  him  in  similar circumstances,  then  criticism  of  the  war
is   aid  and   comfort  to  the   enemy.   A   disturbing   note  was
sounded  in  his  speech  at  Omaha,  with  its  insistence  that  he
and  he  alone  had  been  chosen  to  decide  the  issues  of  war  and
peace.    "If   everyone  in  this  country,"   he  said   in  Texas  last
night,   "was   working   as  hard   to   support   the   principles   of
democracy  as the  men  in  Vietnam  are,  I  think  we  should  have
little  to  worry  about."   Does  it  foster   democracy   to  talk  the
language of  one-man rule?
If   the  cost   of  aggression,   as  the   President   says,  is  to  be
Persuasion  by  Bomb  and  Napalm?
"We  must  use  our  power  to  resist  their  aggression
and  to  try  to  change  their  minds."
—Pres. Johnson,  Des Moines,-June  30.
Sen.   GORE   (D.,  Tenn.)—What   troubles  me  is   the
notion  of  this  Administration that  punishment  is  per-
suasive ...  I  just  know  of  no instance  in history  where
it  has  succeeded."
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  Jime SO.
increased   at   its   source,   why  stop   short   at   the  bombing  of
North  Vietnam?   The  source  of  the  oil  we  are  trying  to  shut
off  is  in  the  Soviet  Union.   So is that  of  the  anti-aircraft  which
rings   Hanoi   and   Haiphong.     Arms,   and   other    supplies,
come  from  China,  and  across  it  from  Russia  and  the  rest  of
the   Soviet  bloc.   If  we  bomb  North  Vietnamese   oil  storage
tanks,  why  not  Soviet  oil  refineries?   If  we  bomb  the  railroads
and  roads  which  carry  supplies  in  North  Vietnam,  why  not
those   which   carry  supplies   in   China?   If   we   attack  North
Vietnam  without  a  declaration  of  war,  picking  and  choosing
our  targets,  why  not  those  of  China  and  the  Soviet  Union?
The  answer  is  that  we  hesitate  to  do  to  such  formidable   big
countries   what  we  feel   free  to  do  to  a  helpless  small   one,
with   only  a  negligible  Navy  or  Air  Force.   But  how  long
before  our  frustrated   hawks  call  for  ultimatums  threatening
to  widen  the  war  to  these  privileged  sanctuaries  unless  all  aid
is  shut  off?    "We  shall  see  this  thing  through  to  the    end,"
President  Johnson  says.   What  does  he  mean  by  "the  end?"
World  War  III?                                                                       July  6
From  the  Angry  Protests  in  the  Senate  The  Day After Hanoi and Haiphong Were Bombed
SEN.  HARTKE  (D.  Ind.)—This  is  the  policy  which  the
hawks  have  indicated,  including   Barry  Goldwater  during
the  campaign  of  two  years  ago. ...  It  is  not  possible  to
find the  road  to  peace  by  escalating  war. .  .  .  Have we now
made  our  last  decision,  the  decision  that,  come  what  peace
opportunities  there  may,  our  way  shall  be  irrevocably  that
of  military  escalation,  of  acceding  one  after  another  to  the
successive  unsuccessful  steps  which pave  the  road  to atomic
holocaust  in  the  sacred  cause  of  anticommunism? ...  I
wonder   how  interested  we   would  be  in  peace   if   we   saw
bombs  dropping on  the  outskirts  of  Washington,  D.  C.?
SEN.  CLARK   (D.,  Penn.)—It  has  been  said  there  is  a
crisis  of credibility in our country with respect  to our  earnest
desire   to   end   the   Vietnamese  war  through   negotiations.
The  Senator  from  Indiana  has  pointed  out,  with powerful
logic,  the  many  occasions  on  which, while  talking  peace,  we
have  stepped  up and escalated  the  war.  .  .  .
SEN.   McGOVERN   (D.,  S.D.)—It   will  be  more   difficult
for  honest  dissent  to  be  heard  henceforth.    The  more  the
bombs  and the  guns  roar,  the  more difficult  it  is  for  thought-
ful  voices  to  be  heard  over  that  kind  of  escalation. ...  I
recall  the  sad  words  of   the  late  President   Kennedy  after
the  Bay  of  Pigs   fiasco.  Immediately after  that  tragic  mis-
use  of  American  power  that  backfired  on  us,  the  standing
of  President  Kennedy  in  the  public  opinion  polls  went  up.
He  turned to  one  of  his  aides  and said,  "Isn't  it  too  bad that
the  worse  we  do,  the  more  our  public  opinion standing  im-
proves?"   I  suspect  that  there  will be  some  temporary  ap-
plause  for  the  recent  action.    But  when  the  people  learn
once  again  that  this  is  not  .the  answer  to  the  kind  of  prob-
lems  that  face  us  in  Vietnam, the  disillusionment  will  set
in  again.
SEN.  CHURCH  (D.,  Idaho)—I  would ask  the  senior  Sena-
tor  from  Indiana  whether  we  are  not  simply  increasing   the
7  *
dosage   of  a  medicine  that  has  already  failed   to  cure  the
patient?    We  notch  up  the  war  to  a  still  higher  level  after
years   of   continuous   escalation,   even   though   the   whole
process  has  brought  us  no  closer  to  a  negotiated  settlement
than  we  were  12  months  ago,  and  even  though  the  number
of   American  troops  engaged   in  the  war  has  increased   by
more  than  tenfold ...  I  do  not  think  Ho  Chi  Minh  can  be
forced   to   the   negotiating  table  on  his   knees—unless   we
drag  him  there  in  chains. ...  No  matter  how  often  we
stress  that  the  North  Vietnamese  have  engaged  in  an  ag-
gression   against   South  Vietnam,  we   cannot   obscure   the
fact  that  the  North  Vietnamese  still  remain Vietnamese and
that  until  the  American  intervention  occurred,  this  was  a
Vietnamese   war  between   various  factions   of   Vietnamese
people.   .   .   .   Given   these    considerations,   it   is   under-
standable  that  the  world  should  think  of   the   Vietnamese
war  in  terms of  American  intervention rather than  in  terms
of  the  aggression  of  north  against  south.
SEN.  McGOVERN:  I  call  attention,  for  example,  to  the
blunt  fact  that  all  but  one of  the  South Vietnamese  generals
who  represent  the  military  junta  fought   with  the  French
against  their  own  people  in  the  war for  independence which
followed  World  War  II.    Would  not  this  be  roughly  com-
parable  to  having eight  or nine  Benedict  Arnolds  attempting
to  run  the  U.S.  in  the  years  that  followed  our  own  war  for
independence  some  175  years   ago?   .  .  .  Mr.  President,  I
view  the  latest  bombing effort  with  deep misgivings  for  two
reasons:  First,  it  represents  another  dangerous  new  dimen-
sion  to  the  Vietnam  war;  and  second,  it  dodges  once  again
the  basic  political  issue  of  the  conflict. .  .  .  What  began  in
the  1950's  as  a  local  struggle  among  two  groups  in  South
Vietnam  has  now  moved  another  step  toward  a  full  scale
international  conflict.
—In  the  UJS.  Senate, June SO.
__
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, July  11,1966
How  Some  Supposed  U.S.  Peace  Initiatives  Evaporate  Under  Close   Questioning
Close-Up  View  of  Our  Slippery  Far  Eastern  Diplomacy  In  Action
Sen.  GORE:  You  say  that  the  bombing of  Hanoi  and  Hai-
phong  were  designed to  speed  the  day  of  a  peaceful  solution.
... It  has  been  suggested  to the  North  Vietnamese govern-
ment  by  our  government  in   different   forms   several  times
that  the  U.S.  would  be  willing  to  stop  the  bombing  of  North
Vietnam  if  North Vietnam  would  stop her  military movement
across  the  parallel  into  South  Vietnam.   Is  that  not  true?
Under  Secretary  of  State  BALL:  In  some  way that  can  be
policed  and  check, yes.
Sen.  GORE:  Subject  to  verification.
Mr.  BALL: That  is  right.
Sen.  GORE:  Now, If  North  Vietnam were  willing  to  stop
military  movements into  South  Vietnam  would  the  U.S.  be
willing  to  stop  military  movement  into  North  Vietnam?
No  Direct  Answer
Mr.  BALL:  Well,  I  would  not  regard  these  as  necessarily
the  parallels  which  one would  pursue in  a  negotiation  because
what  has  been  happening here  is  a  continuance  of  acts  of
aggression   by  the  North  in  the  South  where  the  American
forces'  sole  role  has  been  to  try  to  prevent  that  aggression,
and  we  would  want  to  see  put  into  this  equation  some  very
real  decisions by North Vietnam to  stop  the  acts  of  terrorism,
the  acts of aggression which it  is  committing  in the South....
Sen.  GORE: I  am  persuaded  to  the  view  that  it  is  main-
land  China  that  is  the  mainspring  of  this   conflict  and  the
situs  where  a  settlement  will  ultimately  be  reached,  if  it  is.
Suggestions  hare  recently been  made that  the  U.S.  would
be  willing  to  consider  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  with  Red
China  by  which  both  parties  would  agree  not  to  be  first  to
use  a  nuclear  weapon  against   each  other  except  in  self-de-
fense,  provided  China  herself   would  adhere  to  the   nuclear
weapons  test  treaty.    China  in  a  public  blast  only  a  few
days  ago branded such  suggestions  as  another  trick  of  Presi-
dent  Johnson.   I  thought  that  was  most  regrettable.
What   would  our  Administration's   view  be  to  a   further
major  attempt  to  break  this  barrier   of  credibility  between
the  two  countries,  coupling  these  two  suggestions   with  the
third,  which  the  chairman of  this  committee originally  made,
of  expressing  the  satisfaction  of  the  U.S.  with  a  neutraliza-
tion  of  South Vietnam ?
Mr.  BALL:  First,  let  me  say,  Senator  Gore that  the  U.S.
has,   as  you  know,  never  specifically  offered  the  kind  of  bar-
gain  that  you  mention,  that  we  were  seeking  clarification
of   some  comments  which  the   government  in   Peking   had
made,  but  we  had  never  indicated a  decision  on  the  part  of
the  U.S.  with  regard  to  a  bargain  of  that  kind.
Dept.  of  Ruskification
"Mr.   Dean  Rusk,   the   United  States   Secretary   of
State,  told  a  closed  session  of  the  Council  of  Ministers
of  the  South-East  Asia Treaty  Organization today that
the  United  States  had  made  an  unparalleled  effort  in
South  Vietnam  to  improve  the  living  standards  of  the
people."                   —The  Times  (London),  June 29.
"Though   the   military   conflict   has   been    escalated,
what  worries  some  observers  is  ...    the  other  war in
the   south—for   economic,  social,   and   to  some  extent,
political   reforms.    The   seeds   planted   anew   at   the
Honolulu  conference  in  February   may  not  have  died
altogether,  but  they  have  not  taken  strong  root  and
blossomed. . . . Among the Vietnamese there is a skepi-
cal  doubt  that   their   leaders   really   intend   following
through  on  the  fanfare.    More  optimistic  assessments
in  Washington  of   progress   on  the   pacification   front
are  greeted  by  Saigon  insiders  with  guffaws."
—John  Hughes  from  Saigon  in  the  Christian  Science
Monitor,  July  2.
Sen.  GORE:  Are  you  aware  that  suggestions  have  been
advanced  along this line ?
Mr.  BALL:  Well,  as  I  say,  exactly  what  occurred  was  an
effort   on  our  part  to  seek  some  clarification  on  this  possi-
bility,  but  with  no  decision  on  the  part  of  the  U.S.  govern-
ment  with  regard  to whether  this  was  or  was  not  the  kind of
bargain  which we would  be prepared  to  accept.
[So  it  was  not  so  strange  that  Peking  suspected  a  trick.
—I.F.S.]
Hedges  on  Neutralization
Now  you  ask  whether  this  could  be  coupled with  the  neu-
tralization  of  South  Vietnam.   It  is  a  very  hard  question  to
answer  in open session,  as I  think  you will  appreciate.  . . .
Sen. GORE:  It  seems  to me that unless  there  is  some secu-
rity   against   attack  on  China  itself   with  nuclear  weapons,
and  a  neutralization  of  the  area  adjacent  to  her  is  essential
to  a  political  settlement.  . . .
Mr.  BALL:  Well,  I  would  not  necessarily  accept  the  con-
clusion  that  Hanoi  does  not  have  the  ability  to  make  a  deal
on  its  own  without  the  approval  of  Peiping.    We  have  cer-
tainly  not  concluded  yet   tha*"-  Peiping  calls  the  tune  to  that
extent,  and  I  think  there  is  a  lot  of  evidence to  the  contrary.
—Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee,  June  SO.
Well  Be Clad to  Send  A Sample  Copy of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —  Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
I.  F.  Stone's Weekly      5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Please   renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Nmme  ..........................................................................................
Street    ........................................................................................
City   ..........................................   Zip..........State......................
7/11/66
For  the  enclosed  $5  Bend  a  gift  sub  to:
(To)   Name  ..............................................................................
Street   ........................................................................................
City  ..........................................  Zip..........State......................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted  Filtie*
Indicate  if  announcement  wished   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.   Published  every   Monday  except  in  August,  the  last  week  in   December   and  Ui«
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D.  C.    An  independent   weekly  published   and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $6  in   the   U.S.;    $6  in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.    Air   Mall  rates:
$15  to  Europe;   *20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED