I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966feb21.pdf

============================================================

Unrcported  Insights  From  Kennan's  Testimony^  Pps. 2-3
Just  Little   Old  Lyndon  B.  Jefferson—Till  You  Dare  to  Question  His  War
"One     man  alone  within  his   conscience—whether   in   the     believing  him  wrong,  would  deny  his  right  to  search  and
laboratory  or  the  study  or  the  classroom  or  on  the  street     his  right  to  speak the truth."
corner—is  to  be  jealously  guarded  from  the  thousand  who,                   —LBJ  awarding  medals  to  11 scientists, Feb. 10
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  7
FEBRUARY  21,  1966
101
       WASHINGTON,   D.  C.
16  CENTS
The  Counterfeit  Language  of A  Counterfeit   Cause
When  the  Axis  forces  were  driven out  of  Occupied  Europe,
and  the  Japanese  out  of  Occupied  Asia,  no  one  worried  about
"winning"  and  "pacifying"  the  people.   The  defeat  of  their
oppressors   was  enough  to  bring  them  into  the  streets  cheer-
ing.   This .would  also  be  the  case  in  Vietnam  if  our  govern-
ment's  propaganda  line  were  true.   If  South  Vietnam's people
were   the   victims   of   a   foreign   invasion,   if   the   Viet   Cong
were  a  mere  tool  of  that  invading  Northern   power,   if  they
held  the  peasantry  only  by  fear  and  terror,  there  would  be  no
need   to  worry  about  winning  the  people.   The  only  "pacifi-
cation"  program   necessary  would  be  military  victory.   There
would  be  no  need  to  woo  the  South  Vietnamese  with  promises
of  social  reform  if  they  were  suffering  under  a  foreign  yoke.
If  the  Viet  Cong  were  foreign  oppressors,  all  we  would  have
to  do  is  drive  them  out.
Fooling  Them  and  Fooling  Ourselves
The   Honolulu    conference   and   the   Humphrey    tour   are
only  fresh  strands  in  an  old  web  of  falsehood.   The  weaving,
like  the  war,  began   under   the  French.   One   reason   an  old
Vietnam   hand   like  Mansfield   is  so  appalled   is  because   he
remembers   how  he  himself   was  taken   in.   Just   six  months
before  Dienbienphu,  Mansfield  returned  with  the  first  of  his
Senate  missions  to  report,  "The   military  prospects  of  the  non-
Communist  forces  in  Indo-China  are  improving."   The  French
military then, like  ours  now,  were exulting  in  body  count.  Gen.
Cogny  announced  triumphantly  that  a  search-and-destroy  mis-
sion  had  killed  4,000  guerrillas  and  put  the  crack  320th  divi-
sion  of  the  Viet  Minh  out  of  action.   That  was  more  than
12  years  ago  and  we,  like  the  French,   are  still  winning  in
the  headlines.    This  is  as  true  in  the  field  of   "civic   action"
as  of  the  purely  military.  The  language  out  of  Honolulu  was
once   heard,    too,    from   the    French.     In    Lucien    Bodard's
L'Humiliation   we  hear  the  French   General   Chanson   talking
in   1950   of  the  need   to" wage   "a  people's  war"   and  saying
"We   must   conquer   the   farmers   by  their  hearts."    It's   still
hashish   because   we,  like  the   French,   have   allied   ourselves
with  the  landlords,  the  compradores  and  the  native  profiteers.
Any  real  social  reform  would  seem  to  our  only  allies  hardly
worse  than   a  Viet   Cong  victory.   They'll  fight  to  our  last
dollar,  and  then  flee  with  it  to  the  Riviera.
Every   key   word—whether   pacification    or   democracy   or
revolution—has  had  to  be  given  a  counterfeit  meaning  to  suit
the   real   character   of   the   forces   with  which  we  are   allied.
Ky   in   the   Declaration   of   Honolulu   promised    "a   genuine
Open  Letter  to  the  Soviet   Embassy
Dear  Ambassador  Dobrynin:
In  casting  about  for  some  way  effectively  to  protest
the  Sinyavsky-Daniel trial,  I  decided  the  best  way  to
have  an  impact  on  Moscow  and  to  reach  the  grapevine
of  the  new  youth  in  Russia  would  be  publicly to inform
you  that   I  am  boycotting  all  functions   at  the   Soviet
Embassy   until  these  writers  are  free.   The  trial   dis-
turbed  all  who  remember  the  many  writers  liquidated
under  Stalin,  and  feel  deeply  the   need  to   fight   every
regression   toward  that  ugly  past.   We  had  been   told
labor  camps  had  been  abolished;  now   we   learn   that
four   different   varieties   are   in   operation   and   that
the  two  writers  have  been  sent  to  a  "strict   regime"
camp  for  hardened  criminals.   The  use  in  this  trial  of
Article  70  of   the   Russian  criminal   code,  which  deals
with   "anti-Soviet   propaganda,"  recalls   the   way   the
equally  vague  provisions  about  "counter-revolutionary
crime"  were  used  under  Stalin  against  the  best  in  your
society   while  tale-bearers   flourished.   The  barring   of
the  court  to  foreign  newsmen and  to  friends  and  rela-
tives  of   the  accused  made  a  farce  of   the  claim  that
the  trial  was  open.  And  the  conduct  outside  the  court-
room  of  Komsomol  toughs  recalled  the  part  the  Kom-
somol  played  in  hounding  Pasternak.   This  fine  flower
of  your  party  youth  resembles  the  Fascistic   vigilantes
with  which  progressives   have  sometimes   had  to  con-
tend  in  this  country.                                  —I.  F.  Stone
social   revolution."   So  did  Diem.   He   launched   a  National
Revolutionary  Movement  as  early  as  October   1954.   Ky  prom-
ised  democracy.   So  did  Diem.   He  had  Brother  Nhu  launch
a  Personalist  Labor  Revolutionary  Party  dedicated  to  realizing
"democracy  at  the  level  where  people  are  fighting  and  work-
ing."   That  was  in  1956—the  year  he  also  abolished  election
of  village  chiefs  and  set  up  concentration  camps  for  political
opponents.    After   four   years   of   such   model  revolutionary
democratic  innovations,  the  regime  was  in  such  trouble  that
Kennedy  had  to  rush  Johnson  out  there  to  bolster  Diem  and
promise him  more  "military advisers"  to  deal with the  growing
unrest.   That's  when   Johnson—in  the  overstatement   of   the
century—called   Diem   "the   Churchill  of  Asia."    (To   match
that   we   suppose    Humphrey   will   soon   be   calling   Ky   the
Napoleon  of  the  Pacific.)   The  cast  of  characters  changes  but
the  tactics  remain  the  same.   When  promises  of  social  reform
turn   out   to   be   false,   the   South   Vietnamese   ruling   clique
turns  in  new  promissory  notes  to  the  U.S.  Treasury.    From
1955  to  I960  only  1.4%  of  U.S.  aid  to  Vietnam  went  to  help
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.'F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  21,1966
Unreported  Insights  from  the  Senate's  Vietnam  Hearings
KENNAN:    We   must  not  assume  any  Com-
munist   faction   that   comes   into   power   any-
where   in   the   world   will   function   simply   as
the   spineless   executor   of   the   orders   of   one
of  the  great   Communist  powers ...  It  is not
so  that  when  men  call  themselves  Communists
some  sort  of  magic  transformation  takes   place
within  them  which  makes  them  wholly   differ-
ent   from   other   human  beings   or   from   what
they    were    before.     Feelings    of    nationalism,
ordinary   feelings   still   affect   them   to   a   large
extent  . . .
The   effect   of  the  Vietnamese  crisis,  conflict,
is  not  to  restore  the  unity  between   the   Soviet
Union   and  Communist  China.    I  think  things
have  gone  too  far  for  that.   But  it  is  to   give
their  rivalry  a  form   very  undesirable  from  the
standpoint   of   our   interests   and   the    interests
of  world   peace,   namely  the  form  of  a  contest
to  see  who  can  look   the   most   anti-American,
the   most   critical  of   our   policies.    Who   can
appear   to   be   the   most    violent   defender   of
what   they  call   the  National   liberation   move-
ments ...
What  Would  Kennan  Do?
SEN'.   WILLIAMS:    But   had   you   been   in   a
position   of   authority   at   the   time  what   deci-
sions  do  you  think  you  would  have  made  that
were  any  different  from  those  that  were  made?
KENNAN:    No,   I   think   probably   if   there
was   any   point   where   we  went   wrong   it   was
in   putting   fighting   men  ashore  for    purposes
of  combat ...  It  has  been  my  relief  for  many
years,   and   it   is   a   belief   based   on   the    fact
that  at  one  time  I  had  to  make  a  very  careful
study  of  our  difficulties  in  connection   with  the
intervention   in   Russia   in    1918,   it   has   been
my  belief  that  one  should  be  very,  very  careful
about  our  putting  American  forces  ashore   into
a   situation   of   this   sort   unless   one   can   see
clearly  how  and  at   (one)    point   one  can  get
them  out  again.
SFN.   WILLIAMS:    Now,    my   next   question
is,   recognizing  that  we  are  at  this   point,   we
do   have  a   couple  of   hundred   thousand   men
in   there,   what    would    you   recommend    that
we  do  now ?
KENNAN:    I  would   recommend  that   we  do
not   expand   either   our   own   commitment  of
men   and   resources   to   this   conflict.   That   we
try   to   limit   the   conflict   rather   than   expand
it,  that  we  adopt  in  general  a  defense  strategy
and    put   ourselves   in   a   position    where   we
cannot   be  hurried,  where   we  cannot   be   pan-
icked,   where   we   can   afford   to   wait   and   let
the   logic  of  this  situation  then  gradually  sink
in   on   our   opponent,   and   I   think   then   there
is    a    possibility   that   with    a    little    greater
patience  than  we  have  shown  thus  far,  possi-
bilities    for    an   acceptable   resolution    of    the
conflict   may turn  up.  .  .  .
If    We   Guessed   That   Wrong
In  Business
"If  I  were  a  businessman  and  looking
at   a   potential   market   and   found  such
miscalculation  [as  in  Vietnam],   I  would
have  to  do  something  about  it.   I  would
not  long  survive."
—Cen.  Gat in  testifying,   Feb. 8
When  Tito  (Like  Ho)  Was
Our  Enemy
"I   have  good   reason   to   believe  that
Ho  Chi  Minh  would   resist  the  Chinese
as  much  as  he  resists  the  Russians.   The
present   chairman  of   the   Joint   Chiefs
of   Staff   was  a  Colonel  commanding  the
troops   in  Trieste   [in   1946]    when  we
were   having   serious   trouble   there.     I
was   Chief   of    Staff    at   Naples    at    the
time.  We   had  a  plane  shot  down.  Our
outposts  were  being  attacked.   The  man
[Mihailovitch]  we  supported  in  World
War   II  was  court  martialled  and  assas-
sinated  by  Tito,  and  people  were  up  in
arms  wanting  to  attack  Tito.
"I   think  that  the  best  thing  we  ever
did  was  allow  that  government  to  come
into   being    and   demonstrate   this   man
could   bring    in   being   an   independent
government   of   his   own   free  of  Stalin,
and  defying  him.   I  am  not  at  all  satis-
fied  that  Ho  Chi  Minh  might   come  to
that   and   it   would   be   a  good  govern-
ment.   No  one  has  demonstrated  to  me
that  this  is  not   so."
—Gen.  Gat in  testifying   Feb.  8
SEN. .CHURCH:    Now,   the   NATO  defense
lines  didn't   stifle   Communism,  that  is  to  say
there    are    still    Communist    parties    existing
behind   the   NATO   defense   line,   the   largest
political   party  in   Italy   is   Communist,   and   a
very  formidable  Communist  party  exists   today
in   France,  isn't   that  right?
KENNAN:   That  is  correct.
SEN.   CHURCH:    And    the   reason   that    we
don't   have   behind   the   NATO   defense    lines
guerrilla   wars   in   Western   Europe,   wars   of
national   liberation   in  Western  Europe,   is  be-
cause   the   economies    have   revived,   there   is
internal  cohesion,  there  is  strong  majority  sup-
port  for  democratic  institutions  in  these   coun-
tries,   isn't   that   the   reason   that   Communism
has  not   come  to   prevail   behind   the  NATO
defense  line  in  Western  Europe?
KENNAN:   Absolutely  .  . .
SEN.  CHURCH: ...  We  failed  to  take   into
account    how    very    different    the   underlying
situation   was   in  Asia   and   in   Africa   the   ex-
colonial    regions   of   the   world.    Would   you
agree  with  that?
KENNAN:    I  couldn't   be   more  strongly   in
agreement  .  . .
A   Different    Enemy
SEN.  CHURCH:  .  .  .  Would   it  be  your  judg-
ment   that   in   these   areas   of   the   world   the
people   may  be   less   concerned   or   less    fearful
or   less   opposed    to   Communism   as   such   as
they   are   to   imperialism,   colonialism,   which
they   have   just   experienced   for   two   centuries
in   which  with   great   sacrifice   and   afterwards
with   great   struggle   they   have   finally   over-
thrown ?
KENNAN:    Oh,   yes.    The   power   of   these
various   semantic  symbols  is   entirely   different
in  Asia  than  it  is  in  Europe  .  .  .
SEN.   CHURCH:     Is   there   freedom   as   we
know   freedom   in   most   of   the   countries   of
Asia  imd  Africa  today'
KFNNAN:   There  is  not,  and  I  recall  reading
only   two   days   ago   an   article   by  one   of   our
greatest  authorities  in  this  country  on  Chinese
culture,   in   which   he   pointed   out   that    the
Chinese   language   has  only   one   word   which
remotely  resembles  our  word  freedom  and  that
conveys   the   sense   of   license   and   rather  tur-
bulent indiscipline.
SEN.  CHURCH:   Who   was  that?
KENNAN:    John   Fairbanks   [in   New   York
Review  of  Books,  Feb  17].
SEN.    CHURCH:     Now,    in    these   countries
which    are    mainly   totalitarian,   although    we
always  like  to  include  them  in  that  phrase  we
use   continuously—the   free   world—change   if
it   is  to  come  at  all,  will  often   have  to   come
through  violence,  that  is  to  say  through  revolu-
tion,  rather  than   through  the   process  of   free
elections.
Wilson's  Russian  Hopes
KENNAN:    I  am  sure  that  this  is  inevitable
in   large   parts  of   the  world   .  .   .  free   elec-
tions   presuppose   a   certain   state   of   mind   in
great    masses   of   people.    We   had   the   same
problem   again    in   the   Russian    intervention.
Woodrow   Wilson   hoped   there  might  be  some
sort  of  elections  in  Russia  and  couldn't   under-
stand   that   this   was   a   country   so   torn   by
violence,   by  terror,   by  fear,   by  the   miserable
experiences  of  the  past  that  no  Russian   would
have  trusted  another   Russian  to  open  the  elec-
tion  results  and  read  them  fairly.  .  .  .
KENNAN:    /   think   things   will   change   in
China,    as   they    changed    in    Russia.      They
always  do.   A   new  generation  of  Chinese  lead-
ers  will   come.    They   could   scarcely   be   worse
in  their   attitudes   toward   us  than   the   present
ones,  and  as  I  look  over  the   history   of   inter-
national   affairs,    it  seems  to  me  that  the   coun-
sels   of   patience  and   restraint  have   been   more
effective     as  a  general  rule,  than   the   counsels
of   violence  and  unleashing  unlimited   violence.
Now   there   has   been   great   confusion    pre-
cisely   in   this   respect   about   Hitler   and
1
   the
Nazis  and  no  statement  of  this  sort  that  you
.make   can  be  without   its   exceptions.   There
are   no   universally  valid  generalizations  here.
There  are,  there  can  be,  threats   to  the   peace
that  have  to  be  faced  in  the  way  that  Hitler
Wasting  Bombs  and  Bombers
SEN.   SYMINGTON:   What  would  you
say   about   a   pilot   who   would   say,   "I
am  a  regular,   but   I  do  not  see  why  I
should  risk  it  a  couple  of  times  a  week
bombing  targets  that  we  would  not  even
look   at  in   Korea,   bombing   empty   bar-
racks  or   bombing   a  bus.    If  they   want
us  to  risk  our  lives  in  a  $2  million  air-
plane,  why  do  they  not  give  us  a  mean-
ingful   target   to  attack?"    What   would
be  your  comment?
GEN.  GAVIN:   I  would  agree  with  the
guy  that  said  that  absolutely.
SEN.     SYMINGTON:     We    have   lost
scores   of   pilots   over   North    Vietnam.
The  figure  is  classified.   We   have  also
lost  over  a  half  billion  dollars  in  planes
over  there."
—Senate Foreign  Relations Com.  Feb. 8
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  SI,  1866
.  .  .  Kennan  Draws  Some  Lessons  from  Our  Intervention  in   Russia
should  have  been  faced.
But,  by   and   large,   especially  when   one   is
dealing with  conflicts  which threaten  to  develop
into  great  world   conflicts  on  a  scale   that   has
never   been   known  before  in  history,  surely  it
is   better   to   exhaust  the   counsels  of   patience
and   restraint   before  one  plunges  .  .  .
If  War  Goes  Nuclear
KENNAN:    If   we   do   not   resort   to  nuclear
weapons   and   merely  get   into   a   conflict   be-
tween    our    forces    and    Chinese    Communist
forces   in   Southeast   Asia,   I  should   not  think
that    the    Soviet   Union    would    intervene   in
any   formal    sense.     But    if   nuclear    weapons
come  to  be  used,   I  simply  cannot  predict   the
effects   on   world   opinion,   the   effects   on   our
own   opinion,   and   the   cumulative  quality  of
suih   a  conflict.    It  could   lead   us  to  anything
.   .  .  and   I  am  afraid   if  it  went  to  the  bitter
end    probably    would    create    a    situation    in
which    the    Soviet    Union   would    be   almost
foiced   to  tonic  out   against   us   in  the   strong
military way.
If   that  again  would  develop  into   a  nuclear
exchange   as   between   the   Soviet   Union    and
ourselves,   1  do   not   know   but   this   represents
all   of   it,   a  fringe   of   apocalyptic  Dangers   on
which  I  should  never  like  to  see  this  country
play,   if   you   see   what   I   mean.    This   is   the
edge  of a  precipice  .  .  .
SEN.    PELL:     From    your    own    experience
as  Ambassador  to Yugoslavia.  .  .  . Do you  see
any  hopeful  outlook  from  the  Yugoslav   exper-
ience  with  regard  to  Vietnam  eventually having
a  unified  government?  .  .  .
KENNAN:    It   is   an  observation   that   ought
to  give   us  food  for  thought,  that  it  was  only
a   Communist,  Tito,  who   succeeded   really   in
uniting  the  Yugoslavs   to  this  extent   over  the
course  of  many  years,  and  I  don't  know   how
else  this  can  be  done.    Of   course   in  the   case
of   Germany   and   Korea   these   are   very com-
plicated    situations    because    the    interests   of
other   great   powers   are   extensively   involved,
and   you   don't   get   a   fair   test   of   the   ability
of   the  country  to  unite  itself  if   these   outside
pressures  did  not   exist.
No  Real  Secrets
SEN.    MCCARTHY:   .   .   .  Would   you con-
clude  that   there   is   likely  to   be   a  great   gap
between   the   data   which   the   decision-makers
may  have,  those  who  are  close  to  the  decision,
and  the  information   which  we  have  or  which
you  have?
KENNAN:    Only  perhaps  when  it  comes   to
developments  of   the   last   24  or   48   hours.    I
think  anyone  who  wants  to  follow  the   situa-
tion   attentively  in   the   press   can   know   most
of    what    the    government    knows,    which    is
relevant  to  a  time  space  of  more  than  the  last
Resumption  Under  Wraps
SEN.     SYMINGTON:     Now    that    the
bombing   has   started,   it   is   my  under-
standing  that  the   target   restrictions  are
more  tight  than   they  were  when   it  was
stopped   in   December.
GEN.  GAVIN:   It  seems  to  be.
—Senate Foreign  Relations  Com, Feb.  8
The  Nonsense  About  Prestige
CHRM.   FULBRIGHT:    You   also  think
that   exploit   [Khrushchev's   removal  of
the   missiles  from   Cuba],   that   Russia's
position  in  the  world  has  been  seriously
damaged,    that    her    prestige    has   been
lost,  and  that  today  she  is  a  non-entity
in  the  society  of  nations?
GEN.   GAVIN:   No,    no.    They   came
through  amazingly  well  .  .  .
CHRM.     FULBRIGHT:    Wouldn't     you
conclude   that   having   suffered    what   I
believe   you   thought    was   one   of    the
most   dramatic  setbacks  of   a  major   na-
tion,  having  come  through  in  this  way,
that   this   question   of   prestige   and   face
has  been  grossly  exaggerated ?
GEN.   GAVIN:   Yes.  1  would   say  so.
CHRM.   FULBRIGHT:    Even  in  this   in-
stance   [Vietnam]   that  isn't   the   major
consideration.     It   still   comes   back   to
the   wisdom  of  whether  one  should pur-
sue  a  particular  course  or  not, and   the
face   and   prestige  of   the  U.S.  is  not   a
major  consideration.   Is  that  correct?
GEN.   GAVIN:    I  would  say  it   is.
—Senate Foreign  Relations Com. Feb.  8
24  or  48  hours.
SEN.   MCCARTHY:    If   you   go   back   beyond
48   hours  as  a  basis   for   judgment,  we   ought
not  to  be  frightened  off  by  those  who   say  "if
you  knew  what  I  knew."
KENNAN:    No,   and  if  I  put  this  disclaimer
into   my  statement   here,   it   is  because   I   have
hail    friends    who    profess    to    a    specialized
knowledge  of  Vietnam,  and   have  shouted   me
down   very   brutally   and   say,  "you  have   no
right   to   open    your   mouth   about    it.     You
have  never  been  there,  and  you  shouldn't   have
any  ideas  about  it  .  .  ."
Not  Really   Aggression
KENNAN:     I   think   the   use   of   the   word
"aggression"   with   what    we    are   facing   in
South  Vietnam  is  confusing,  I  think  that   the
present   situation   has   so   complicated   a   back-
ground,  so  much  of  it  does  result  from  things
that  have  happened  within  South  Vietnam  and
not    outside   of    it,    not   only   that,   but    the
border   between   North   and   South   Vietnam  is
of   a  curious  quality.   It  was   not   meant   orig-
inally   to   be   the   border   between    states.    All
these  things  seem  to  me  to  indicate  that  when
one   uses  the  terms  "aggression"  as—some  of
the  people  in  our  government  have  been  doing
it—one  confuses  the  issue ...  I  do  not  think
\\e   can   afford    to   delude   ourselves   that   the
Vietcong   are   simply   an   external   force   or   a
force   that  would  not  exist   if  there   were  not
external   encouragements.    They   might  not   be
so  strong,  but   all   accounts  indicate  that   they
were   fairly   strong   before   they   had   this   help
from   the  North   Vietnamese.
SEN.   CASE:    I   take   it   you   disagree   rather
sharply    with   l.'nder   Secretary   of   State   Ball
recently  in  his  Northwestern  University  speech
in   «hich   he   said   that   North   Vietnam   and
Hanoi  systematically  created  the  Vietcong   .  .  .
and  it  is  purely  a  fictitious  organization   created
by  Hanoi  .  .  .
KENNAN:   That  is  not  the  impression   I have.
2  .
KENNAN':     During     the    peace     conference
(1919),  some  of  our  allies  persuaded  Admiral
Kolchak,    the    head    of    the   anti-Communist
forces   in   Siberia  to   sign   up   to  a   declaration
of   high  democratic  principle  precisely   for   the
purpose   of   getting   aid   out    of   the    United
States.   In  fact,  our  associates  wrote  the  docu-
ments   for    him   in   terms   that   they   thought
would  appeal  to  the  idealistic  American  mind,
and   it   had   no   effect.     The   prerequisites    for
this  sort  of  thing  were  non-existent   in  Siberia
at  the  time.   Anybody  who  knew  the  situation
would   have   told   us  that,   and   Kolchak  him-
self    was   totally   swept   away   within   a   year
and  executed  .  . .
Dubious  of  Ky
SEN    FULBRIGHT:    Do   you   hare   any   reason
to  believe  that  General  Ky  has  any  deep   under-
standing   of   this  kind   of   document?
KENNAN:     Well,    this,  is    precisely     what
teems  to me Io be implausible   .  .  .
KENNAN:    I  was  surprised   to  see  a  day   or
so  ago  in  a  column  in  the   papers   written  by
a   friend   of   mine,   and   opposing   the   idea   of
enclaves,  the  statement  that  if  we  settle  down
to  a  defensive  strategy  there  as  General  Gavin
proposed,   we  could   just  wipe  out   the   entire
South   Vietnamese   force   as   a   factor   in    the
situation;  that  they  would  become   demoralized
and   non-resistant  as  a  factor   in   the   situation
overnight.
I   can  only  say  if   this  is  true,  if   they   are
so   weak   a   reed   as   this,   then   I   would   very
seriously   question    how   much   we   wanted   to
have  our  fate   linked   to  these   people ...  If
there   is   any   truth   in   the   estimates   of    the
strength   and   the   numerical  strength   of    the
South   Vietnamese   forces   which   we   read   in
the     papers,    these    people  • have    plenty    of
strength  to  defend   their  own  position   further
afield    in   the   country.    It   is   a   question    of
their   resolve  and  their  political  basis.
A  Policy   Nobody   Knows
SEN.    LAUSCHE:     What    is   the    alternative,
if    you   have  one,  to   the   course   which   our
government  is following?
KENNAN:    I   am  not   sure  what  the   course
is  that  o--r  government  is  now   following.   If
I   knew   wliat   it  was. it   I  could  see  it   more
clearly,   I   could   speak   better   perhaps   to   the
question  of  an  alternative  to  it.
And  If  We  Did  Defeat  China?
"But    I    challenge    any    thesis    that
destroying   the    military   might   of    red
China  would  be  in  our  long  range  inter-
est.   We  would  create  there  by  military
means  a  great  power  vacuum.   Then  we
would   have   to  go   in   there   with hun-
dreds  of   thousands  of   men   to  try   and
fill  that   vacuum  which  would  bring   us
face  to  face  with  Russia  along  its   7000-
mile   frontier.    If   we   failed   to   go   in,
then   Russia   herself   would   fill   it   and
the   threat   to   our   security   would   not
have  been  abated  one  iota."
—Gen.  Matthew   B.  Ridgeu'ay's   mem-
oirs,  Soldier   (Harper,   1956),  as  quoted
by  Sen.  Frank  Church  at  Senate   Foreign
Relations  Comm.  hearings,  Feb. 8.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  21,1966
Ky  Not  Only  Admires  Hitler, But  Wants  to  Imitate His  Method  of  Control
(Continued  from   Page One)
the   farmers  but   when   this   course   brought   Diem   close   to
collapse,  he  had  no  difficulty  in  selling Johnson  and  Kennedy
a  new  bill  of  goods.   The   11-point  program  of   rural  educa-
tion,   health   and   social   reform   jointly   promised   by   Saigon
and   Washington   on  Jan. 4,  1962, reads  like  a  carbon  copy
of  the  Honolulu   Declaration.   There's   no  sucker  bigger   than
the  one  who's  anxious  to  sell  himself  a  bill  of  goods.   And
that  in  Vietnam,  is  us.
Pacifying  Or   Policifying?
Judging  by  experience,  this  new  "pacification"  program  is
liable  to  end   up  by  driving  more  of  the  South   Vietnamese
into  the  arms  of  the  Viet  Cong.  There  has  been  one  common
feature   in  the  various  "pacification"   programs   of   the   past,
from   Diem's   "agrovilles"  and  "New Life   Hamlets"   to  our
"Operation    Sunrise".    This   has   been   to   herd   people    into
compounds  where  they  can  be  kept  under  surveillance.   The
promised   dawn   of   social   reform   has   always  turned   into
another   nightmare   of   police   repression.    Ky's  pacification
scheme,   as  outlined  in  a  Charles  Mohr  dispatch  from   Saigon
to  the  \eu'  York   Times  Jan.  21  is  very  much  in  this  pattern.
The  pacification  teams,  Mohr  reveals,  have  been  trained  under
the   aegis   of   that   splendid    force   for   democracy,   our   CIA.
They  will  begin  by  subjecting  every  villager  to  private  inter-
rogation  to  weed  out  suspected  subversives.  We  may  be  sure
few  villagers  will  have a  lawyer  at  hand  or  an  open  telephone
to   the   American   Civil   Liberties  Union.   The   best   way  for
the   villager  to   pacify   his   pacifiers   will   be   to   tell   all   he
knows  about  his  relatives and  neighbors.   The  teams  will  then
organize   the  cowed   villagers  into  a  network  of  organizations
so as  to  bring  them,  as  Mohr  was told,  "under  some   discipline
and   control."   It's not  surprising  that  one  official    confessed
to   Mohr,  "It's a   little  bit   totalitarian."    The   idea,   as   this
official  explained  it,  "is  to  tie  each  person  to  some  kind  of  a
controlled   organization."    We   can   think   of   a   large   West
European  country  which  had  the  misfortune  to  be  "pacified"
just  this  way  only  a  few  decades  ago.  Ky  wasn't  making  a
silly  slip  when  he  told   the  London   Sunday   Mirror  last  July
4,  "People  ask  me  who  my  heroes  are.  I  have  only  one—
Shadow   of  That   Man  Bilbo
It  is  one  ojLthe  oldest   but  unfortunately truest   of
legal  saws  that  circumstances  alter  cases.   It  may  help
to   ease   wounded   feelings   in   the  expulsion  of  Julian
Bond   from   the   Georgia  legislature  that   one   of   the
precedents  to  which  the  Court  of   Appeals  resorted   in
upholding   it   was   that   of   Senator   Bilbo,   the   worst
Negro-baiter  Mississippi ever  produced.  When the U.S.
Senate  met  in  January,  1947,  Bilbo's  right  to  his  seat
on  re-election  was  challenged  by  Sen. Glen  H.  Taylor,
the  Idaho  Democrat  soon  to  run  for  Vice  President  on
the  Wallace  ticket.   A  majority  was  mustered   against
Bilbo  on  charges  of  corruption  and  on  the  ground  that
his  racial  views  were  "dangerous  to  the  perpetuity  of
free  government."   He  was  forced  to  stand   aside  and
later  died  before  the  motion  to  exclude  could  be  voted
on.   The  issue  then  as  now  is  whether  a  legislature   is
the  final  judge  of  the  "qualifications" of  its  own mem-
bers,   and   whether—under   separation   of   powers—the
courts  can  intervene.   The  majority  in  the   Bond   case
held  that  the  Courts  could not. But  Chief  Judge  Tuttle
in  dissenting   held  that  the  situation  was   different   in
Georgia  where  the  judiciary  is  given  explicit  power  to
overrule   legislative   acts.    Judge   Tuttle   said    Bond's
opposition  to  the  war  did  not  fit  into  any  of  the  specific
reasons   the   Georgia  constitution   sets   forth   for dis-
qualifying   a  legislator.    He  might  win  on  this  in  the
U.S.  Supreme  Court  if  reelected  and  again  denied  his
seat.
Hitler."   When  Ky  said  "I  admire  Hitler  because  he  pulled
his  country  together   when   it  was  in  a  terrible  state  in   the
early  30s," Ky  knew  what  he  meant.   For  Hitler    "pacified"
the  German  people  by  a  similar  system  of  block  surveillance,
and   mass  organizations,   all   under  governmental   control,   so
that  everyone  was  locked  firmly  into  a  giant  goose-step.   The
New   Democracy   in  prospect   for   South   Vietnam   looks   like
the  Old  Fascism.
We   could   easily   disprove   this,   of   course,   by  one   swift
step  forward.   We  could   force   Ky  to  allow   freedom   of   the
press  in  South  Vietnam.   But  what  we  fear  is  that  if  the  gag
were  removed,  the  first  agonized  cry  would  be  for   neutralism
and  peace.   And  peace  is  not  what—in  this  peculiar  language
—we  mean  by pacification.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped   Addressed   Envelope
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Name   ...................................
Street   .................................
City   ......................................
For  the  enclosed  $5 send
(To)    Name   ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska  Are.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a  sob  for  the   enclosed  $5:
....Zone.. ....... ...State.. ..................
2/21/66
a  gift  sub  to:
City   ..........................................Zone............State....................
For  $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The  Haunted    Fifties
Indicate  if  announcement   wished   D
IE  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.   ZOO 15
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday  except  in   August,  the  last  week   in   December   and   the
first   week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July   at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..   N.W.,   Washington,  D.  C.    An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.   F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   S5  in   the  U.S.;   $6   in   Canada;   $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
S15  to  Europe;   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED