I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1966
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1966sep26.pdf

============================================================

Ike  Sells  the  Use of  A-Bombs  in  Vietnam,  P.  4
The  Public  Seems  to  Have  A  Better  Grasp  of  Realities  Than  The  President
"Only  one  person  in  five  predicts  a  total  U.S.  military  victory  in  Vietnam."
—George  Gallup's  latest  poll  (Sept.  18)  showing  a further   decline in  LBJ's  popularity  to 48  percent.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
VOL.    XIV,  NO.  29
September   26,  1966
101
      WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
15  CENTS
Half  Dove,  Half  Hawk  and  Wholly  Opportunist
Eighteen  months   later,  two  John   F.  Kennedy  aides  have
joined   the   teach-ins   against   the   Vietnamese   war,   Arthur
Schlesinger,   Jr.,   in   an   article   for   the   New    York    Times
Sunday   Magazine   Sept.   18,  Richard  Goodwin   in   a   speech
to   the  national   board   of   the   ADA   the   day  before.    They
now  make  their  own  much  of  the  criticism they  disdained  at
the   time  of   the  Washington   teach-in  in   May  of   last  year;
what  was  then  heretical  has  now  become  obvious  and   respect-
able.   But  both  the  "middle  way  out"   offered   by  Schlesinger
and  the  "National  Committee  Against  Widening  The   War"
proposed  by  Goodwin  are  opportunistic  in  design.    Goodwin's
rhetoric  before  the  ADA  was heroic.   In  pursuit  of  principle,
a  man  should  be  ready  to  stand  "if   necessary,  alone  against
the  multitude."   It  is  "our  duty  as patriots ...  to  oppose any
President"    whose   policy   "threatens   the   grandeur   of    this
nation."    But  all  he  opposes  is  any  further   escalation   of   the
war   in   the  North.    His   committee   "will   not   be  aimed  at
withdrawal  or  even  a  lessening  of  the  war  in  the  South  .  .  .
It  will  neither  be  against  the  Administration  nor  for  it     ...
Its  purpose  is  to  help  the  President."   Its  stand  "will  not  end'
the  war  in  South  Vietnam.   It  may even  prolong  it  .  .  ."   He
sounds  like  a  Patrick  Henry  saying,  "Give  me  liberty  or  give
me  death—or  give  me  some  compromise  so  I  can  stand  with
the   British."
Free  Elections  a  La  Ky  and  LBJ?
Schlesinger,   though  far  abler,  is  in  much  the  same  position.
When  he  pinch-hit  for  McGeorge   Bundy  at  the   Washington
teach-in,   defending   the   Johnson   war   policy,   though   with
reservations,  Schlesinger  asked the  professors  to  moderate  their
criticism.   "What  this  country needs,"  he  quipped,  "is  a  good
night's  sleep."   His  New  York   Times  article  is  an  awakening
from  his  to  a  brilliant  and  passionate  attack  upon  the  fallacies
of  the  war.   But  he  differs  from  Goodwin  only  in   proposing
that  we  "taper  off"  the  bombing  of  the  North  "as  prudently
as  we  can"  and  offer  the  Vietcong  amnesty  if  they  lay  down
their  arms,  open  up  their  territory  and  abide  "by  the  ground
rules  of  free  elections."   This  is  a  lot  to  ask  after  the  recent
farce  in  Saigon.   In  the  meantime  he  is prepared  like  Goodwin
for  intensification of  the  war  in  the  South,  though  with  more
stress  on  social  reform.   This  looked  promising  when  John  F.
Kennedy  first  broached   it  in  1961.   It  is  delusion  today.   So
is  Schlesinger's  notion   that  the  U.S.   can  draw  back  and  let
the  South  Vietnamese  army  "take  all  the  initiative  it  wants."
It  is clear  by now that  it  has  no  stomach  for  battle.   Schlesinger
is  still  engaged   in   the   same   self-deception   he   criticizes   in
White Power at  Work
From  a  hard-boiled political  point  of  view,  the  sur-
prise  about  this  year's  civil  rights  bill  is  how  close  it
came  to  victory.    It  was  no  secret  that  the  inclusion
of  "open  housing" provisions  would  risk  defeat.   These
provisions  had  to  be  cut  down  in  the  House  until  they
reached  only  40%  of  future—and  higher-priced—hous-
ing.    The  small  home  and  apartment  owner  was   left
secure  in  his  racism.    But  the  House  before  passage
did  add  the   Conyers  amendment  for  a  Fair  Housing
Board  with  powers  like  those  of   the  National  Labor
Relations  Board.    In  the  Senate,  only  four  Democrats
were   recorded  against   cloture,  only  one—Lausche  of
Ohio—from    a   State   with   any   sizeable    number   of
Negroes.     Even  on  the   G.O.P.   side,   there  were  only
two  votes  against  cloture  from  Northern  States  with
large  numbers of  Negro  voters: Dirksen of  Illinois  and
Murphy   of   California.    Dirksen  and  the  Republicans
killed  the  bill.    The  Administration was   afraid   of  a
real  fight  before  November,  lest  it  make  white  votes
for  the  G.O.P.   So  the  White  House  preferred a  quick
defeat.    The  painful  truth  is  that  whites  do  not  want
to  live  beside  Negroes,  and  that  Negroes  see  through
all  the  complexities  to  this  essential   fact.    The  out-
come   will   add   to   their  despair   and   to   the  growing
racial   crisis.     Ideally,   the   President   ought   to   heal
wounds  and  restore  faith  by  issuing  the  kind  of  sweep-
ing  executive  order  on  housing  that  Kennedy  failed  to.
The   bulk   of   the   home   market   depends  on   Federal
money,   and   there   is   no   good   reason   why   whites
shouldn't  be  forced  to  choose  between  Federal  aid  and
their  prejudices.   But  the  chances  of  such  an  executive
order  are  nil;  it  would  add  to  Johnson's  unpopularity.
Black   power?     It's   windy   rhetoric  beside   the  white
power  quietly at  work  to  keep  the  Negro  in  his  ghetto.
the  past  and  he  engages  in  it  for  the  same  reason—because  it
is  not  politic  to  face  up  to  the  whole  truth.
The   Goodwin  proposal   fo>  a  new  committee   nevertheless
raises  serious  political  questions.   One's  attitude  toward  it  will
depend  on  one's  assessment  of  the  war.  If  Johnson  is  planning
an  invasion  of  the  North,  with  all  the  heightened   risk  that
entails   of   war  with   China,   then   a  broad   committee   based
"simply"  as  Goodwin   says  on  "the   victorious  slogan  of   the
Democratic  party  in  1964 ...  No  wider  war"  might  be the
answer.    But   if   Johnson—as  many  well-informed    observers
here  believe—is  planning  not  an  invasion  of  the  North  but
a  major  expansion  of  the  war  in  the  South,  then  the  committee
could   end  up  by  being  as  big   a  trap  for   the   peace   forces
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F  JStone's  Weekly,  September  26, 1968
Just  When  12  Nobel  Prize  Winners  Warn  MLF  Prevents  Non-Prolifcration  Pact
The  Prime  Author  of  MLF Is Approved  for High Office in State Department
The   day   after   a   distinguished   committee,   including   12
Nobel  Prize  winners,  made  an  appeal   to  President   Johnson
on  the  urgent  need  for  a  non-proliferation   treaty,  the  Senate
Foreign   Relations  Committee,   many  of   whose  members   are
supposed  to  be  liberal  and  aware,  took  a  step  which  undercut
that  effort.   The  appeal  to  the  White  House  called  the  plan
for   a  multilateral  nuclear  force  the  obstacle  to  an  agreement
with  the  Russians  and  asked   that  the  MLF  be  shelved.   It
warned  that  no  less  than  12  countries   could  produce  nuclear
arms  within  three  years,  and  little  time  was  left  to  prevent
a  world, nuclear  arms  race.   Yet  the  very  next  day  the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee  by voice  vote  favorably  approved
the  nomination  of  Robert  R.  Bowie  to  be  Counsellor   of  the
State  Department.   Bowie  is  the  father  of  the  MLF  idea  and
still  favors  it,  as  he  made  clear  in  his  confirmation  hearings
last  August.  Senator  Clark  of  Pennsylvania,  Bowie's  principal
critic  at  the  hearings,  had  asked  that  no  vote  be  taken  on  the
nomination  that  day because  he  was tied  up  on  poverty  legisla-
tion.   The  Committee  nonetheless   voted   in  his  absence,  and
the   Senate   routinely  approved   the  nomination.    Only   Clark
appeared  to  oppose  it.   "There's  not  a  dove  in  the  Senate De-
partment,"  he  protested,  to  an  almost  empty  Senate  chamber.
A Trio of  Hard-Liners
Bowie  was  for  four  years a  right  hand  man  to  John   Foster
Dulles  in  the  State  Department,  first  as  director  of  the  policy
planning   staff   and   then   as  assistant   Secretary  of   State   for
policy  planning.   Bowie's  principal  aid  in  selling  the   MLF
idea,  Henry  Owen,  has  recently  been  made  the  chief  of  the
Department's  Policy  Planning  Staff.   With  Walt  W.   Rostow
in  the  White   House,   these  three  men  represent   a  hard-line
trio  in  key  policy-making positions.   Senator  Clark's  vigorous
and  thorough  interrogation  of  Bowie  before  the  Foreign  Rela-
tions  Committee brought  out that  Bowie was with  Dulles  when
he   left   the  Geneva  conference   in   1954   to  register   his  dis-
approval  of  the  negotiations  to  end  the  Vietnamese  war.    "I
went  when  Mr.  Dulles   went,"   Bowie  said.   He  still  favors
war  over  negotiation.   "To  me  the  strategy  of  attempting  to
coerce  the  Vietcong  into  desisting  from  subversion,"  he  told
Senator  Clark,  "is  a  rational  strategy  and  is  worth  the  risks
it  entails."   Clark  asked,  "including  a  constantly  accelerating
numb'er  of  American  casualties?"   Bowie replied,  "Well,  along
with  the strategy go  the  casualties."  When  Johnson  announced
the  Bowie appointment  last  July  5,  a  number  of  liberal  Sena-
U Thant's Twin  Nuclear   Warnings
"It  is   difficult   to  conceive  of   any  other  reason   for
these   underground  tests   than  that  they   are  intended
to  produce more sophisticated  nuclear  weapons  or, per-
haps,   to   develop   antiballistic   missile   systems.    The
possible   consequence  are   alarming.    If   there   should
be  a  unilateral  technological  breakthrough  by  one  of
these   powers  in  either  offensive   or  defensive  nuclear
weapon  capability,  it  could  upset  the  existing   uneasy
balance  of  terror and lead  at  once  to  a  new  and  greatly
accelerated  nuclear  arms  race.  .  .  .
"The  dangers  of  nuclear proliferation are  very  real.
.  .  .  The  risks  that  now  exist  of  the  further  spread  of
nuclear  weapons  hold  such  perils  for  humanity  that
international  safeguards  should  be  established  not  only
over  nuclear power  reactors  but  also  over  other  nuclear
plants  which  produce,  use  or  process  significant  quan-
tities  of  fissionable  materials."
—From  the Secretary  General's new  report  to  the  UN
tors  talked  privately of  fighting  it,  but  the  opposition—except
for  Clark  evaporated.   The  Boston  Globe  deserves  credit   for
sparking  earlier  protest  with  an  editorial  (July  9)   on  Bowie,
"A  Brinkman  to  Washington."
Earlier   in  the  Johnson   Administration,  the  MLF   seemed
to  have  been  scrapped  in  favor  of  a  plan  by  McNamara  to
offer   the  Germans  consultative  arrangements  within  NATO
on  nuclear  matters  instead  of  the  "finger  on  the  trigger"  the
Russians  fear  in  the  MLF.   But  Rusk  like  Bowie  still  favors
giving  the  Germans   a  share  in  what  Clark   called    "nuclear
hardware".   The  Bowie  appointment  will  strengthen  those  who
think  it  more  important  to  please  the  German  military  than
to   come   to   terms   with   the   Russians.    These   men   could
have  increased  their  numbers  and  power  only  because   their
viewpoint  is  congenial  to  Johnson's.    The  liberals  on   Senate
Foreign  Relations  had  a  duty  to  air  the  significance  of   the
Bowie  appointment.    They  have  again  shown  how  little  they
can   be   depended    upon   even   when   Elsenhower's    scientific
adviser,  George  Kistiakowsky,  and  Kennedy's  scientific  adviser,
Jerome   Wiesner,   join   as  they   did   in   that   public   warning
against  the  consequences   of  the  MLF.   The   impressive   plea
they  signed  (the  text  was  published  in  the  New  York   Times,
Sept.  15)  made  this  an  ideal  moment  to  focus  public  attention
on  Bowie's  views  and  background.   Vietnam  is  not  the  only
obstacle  to  agreement  with  Moscow.
An  Appeal  to  the  White House  to  Put  A  Curb  on  Chemical  and  Biological  Arms
"We  American  scientists  wish  to  warn  against  any  weak-
ening  of  the  world-wide  prohibitions  and  restraints  on  the
use  of  chemical  and  biological (CB)  weapons.   CB weapons
have  the  potential of  inflicting,  especially on civilians, enor-
mous  devastation   and  death  .  .  .  they   could  become  far
cheaper  and  easier  to  produce  than  nuclear  weapons  .  .  .
they   lend  themselves  to   use   by  leadership  that   may   be
desperate,  irresponsible or  unscrupulous.  .  .  .
"During  the   Second  World  War,  the  U.S.  maintained a
clearly  stated policy  of  not initiating  the  use  of  CB weapons.
In  the last  few  years the U.S. position  has become less  clear.
Since  the  late  1950s,  Defense  expenditures on  CB weapons
have  risen  several  fold.  .  .  .
"Most  recently,  U.S.  forces   have  begun  the  large-scale
use   of   anti-crop   and   'non-lethal'  anti-personnel  chemical
weapons  in  Vietnam.    We  believe  this  sets  a   dangerous
precedent.  .  .  .  The  employment  of  any  one  CB  weapon
weakens  the  barriers  to  the  use  of  others."
—From  a  letter  to  the  President,  asking  a  White  House
study  of  CB  arms  control, an  end  to  the  use  of  CB  weapons
in   Vietnam   and   a  declaration   that   the   U.S.   would   not
initiate  the  use  of  CB  weapons.   Among  the  initiators   are
the  famous  heart  specialist  Paul  Dudley  White  of  Boston,
the  Harvard   chemist  Paul  Doty,   the  Wisconsin  geneticist
James  F.  Crow,  Freeman   J.  Dyson,  Eugene   Rabinowitz,
John  T.  Edsall  and  Matthew   Meselson.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F  .Stone's  Weekly,  September  26, 1966
German-Born  Bomber  Pilot  A  Little  Vague  on  the  Freedom  He  Was  Defending
A  New  Naval—and  Perhaps  Movie  Hero—Makes  His  Debut  in  Washington
Lt.  (jg)   Dieter  Dengler,  USNR,  a  handsome  young  fellow
of  28, in dazzling Navy whites,  appeared  under TV  floodlights
before  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  Sept.  16  to  tell
how  he  refused  under  torture to  sign  a  statement  condemning
the  U.S.  while  a  Communist  prisoner  in  Laos  and  how   he
escaped   last  June.    He   was  captured   in   February  after   his
plane  was  shot   down  by  ground   fire  while  on   a   bombing
mission  over  the  North  Vietnamese  border.   At  the  close  of
his  story,  both  the  Senators  and  the  audience—for   the  first
time  in  the  memory of  reporters  present—broke  into  applause.
One   felt   that  a  new   naval—and   perhaps   movie—hero  was
being  born.
Why  Did  He  Carry  His  German  Passport?
According  to  a  Pentagon  press  release,  the  only  documents
Dengler   was  carrying  when  captured  were  his  ID  card   and
the  expired  German  passport   he  used  when  he  came  to  the
U.S.   in   1957.    He   is  now  a  U.S.  citizen.   The   news  that  a
pilot  with  a  German   passport   had  been  captured   created  an
uproar   in   Germany   where   it   was   cited   as   evidence   that
Germans  were  being  recruited  for   service  in  Vietnam.    The
passport  has  never  been  satisfactorily  explained.   It  is  a  viola-
tion  of  regulations  to  go  into  combat  with  anything  but  one's
ID   card.    Dengler   said   he   carried   the-  passport   because   it
would  explain  his  German  accent,  an  explanation  that  would
more  plausibly  fit  the  Battle  of  the  Bulge,  where   American
and  German  troops  were  locked   in  combat  than  the   jungles
of  Southeast  Asia where  natives can't  tell  one  white  man  from
another.   Perhaps  Dengler   thought  he  might  get  better   treat-
ment  by  using  the  passport  to  prove  he  was  a  German   rather
than  an American.
No  such  questions  were  raised  by  the  Senators,  who  treated
Dengler   with   small-boy  admiration.   The   most   fervent  was
Senator  Thurmond,  who  broke  into  a  threnody  on  the  subject
of  freedom,  "the  most  precious  word  in  the  English  language
next  to  God",  and  wanted  to  know  what   message   Dengler
had   on   the   subject  for   the  young  people  of.  this  country.
Dengler  seemed  vague.   His  only  description  of  freedom  was
that  it  meant  being  able  "to  walk  down  the  street,  just  to  go
and  buy  what  you  want."   This  sounded  more  like  the  Con-
sumers'  Union  than  Jefferson.   "And  if  it  means  fighting  for
it,"   Thurmond   pressed   him,   "it   is  your  opinion  that   they
would   be  following   the   part   of   wisdom   to   do   so,   would
they  not?"   "If  the  government  thinks  so,"   Dengler   replied,
"yes,  sir."   The  answer  seemed  perfectly  to  fit  the  accent. *
Conscience-Stricken  U.S.   Pilots
"Although  Pentagon  officials  are  reluctant  to  talk  about
it,  there  is  another  reason  for  the  lagging  reenlistment
rates:  A  few  pilots  in  Vietnam  have   turned   in   their
wings  rather  than  fly  in  the  war."
—AP from  Washington,  p. 33 early edition  New  York
Times,  Sept.  18, "Severe  Shortage  of  Airmen  Seen",  re-
vealing that  some  600 Air  and  Navy  pilots  are  dead  or
missing  in  the  Vietnam  war.    The  admission  that  some
pilots  have  refused   to  fly  confirms  a  report  to  which
we  called  attention  earlier  this  year.   The  Swiss  jour-
nalist,  Fernand  Gigon,  in  his  book Les  Americains  face
au  Vietcong   (p.  151,  Flammarion,  Paris,  1965)  said  he
learned   in  Vietnam  that  some  U.S.  pilots  refused   to
bomb  for   reasons  of  conscience  and   were   allowed   to
turn   in  their   wings   and   go  home  after   signing   a
declaration  that  they  would  reveal  "neither  the  reasons
for  their  leaving  nor  the  scenes  they  had  witnessed".
Senator  Smith  wanted  to  know  if  peace  demonstrations   at
home  had  encouraged   the  Viet  Cong.   "The   only  thing  that
I  heard,"  Dengler  told  her,   "was  that  these  Pathet  Lao  think
that  the  U.S.  is  going  to  go  broke  by  the  amount  of  aircraft
they  shoot  down."    Senator  Byrd  asked  whether  he  had   seen
any  evidence  of  Chinese  participation  in  the  war.   Dengler,  no
doubt   unaware  that  the  Pentagon   press  release  said  he  stole
a  Chinese   rifle  when  he  escaped,   said  "I  saw  Russian  trucks
and  Russian  weapons  and  I  saw  U.S.  weapons.   I  did  not  see
any   Chinese   indication  of   anything,   sir."    Perhaps  he   had
better   be  re-briefed.    Senator   Russell  was  disturbed  because
Dengler's  captors  wore—as  the  Pentagon   press  release  said—
"U.S.   type  shirts  and  trousers,  sunglasses  and  rubber  boots"
and  had  U.S.  M-ls  and  carbines.   U.S.  military  aid  certainly
gets  around.
Dengler  said  the  villagers were  friendly.   No  one  asked  him
how  they  felt  about  U.S.  bombings,  or  what  kind  of  gas  we
were  dropping  on  them—at  a  press  conference  3  days earlier
in   San  Diego,   Dengler   said  that  when   he   heard   a   plane
overhead   and   smelled   the  gas   it  was  dropping,  he   said   to
himself,   "Man,   that  is  Uncle  Sam's  gas.   That  is  real"   and
came  out  of  hiding  and  laid  down  an  SOS.   In  San  Diego  he
was  asked  whether  he  expected  to  be  returned  to  active duty
in  Vietnam.   "I  hope  not,"  was  the  reply,  "but  if  Uncle  Sam
wants  me,  I  certainly  will  be  on  my  way."   Otherwise  he  said
he'd   rather  stay  in  the  United  States  and   open   "a  German-
type  restaurant."
Two  Replies  by U  Thant  at  Press  Conference
"In  my  own  country,  Burma, there  were  elections  for  the
Constituent  Assembly   in  1947,  a  few   months   before   inde-
pendence,  in  a  sort  of  civil  war  situation.    Of  course  there
were  pressures  on  the  voters  from  all  sides.    At  that  time
the  Burmese  government  did  not  bar  those  directly  or  in-
directly  connected  with  the  Communists  or  neutralists  from
running  as  candidates.   Everybody  was  free  to  run  as  can-
didates.    At  that  time  the situation  was  also  very bad in  my
country.   There  was  an  insurrection  going  on  after  the  war.
But  I  must  say  that  the  situation  at  that  time  was  not  so
messy   as   the  situation  now  prevailing  in  South  Vietnam.
Another  difference  is  that  in  Burma  at  the  time  there  were
Sept.  19 Which  Undercut  U.S.  Propaganda
no  foreign   elements."
—When  asked  about  the  elections  in  South  Vietnam.
"On  the  projected  Asian  conference  .  .  .  towards  a  peace-
ful   solution  of  the  Vietnam  problem  .  .  .  the  motivations
are  very  laudable.  .  .  .  Regional  problems  should  be  settled
by  regional   machinery.  .  .  .  But  what   is   more  important
are  the  political  factors.  .  .  .  Some  participants in  the  con-
flict  are  claiming  that  this  is  a  holy  war.  .  .  .  While  the
issues  are  framed  in  that  context,  I  do not  think  it  is  realis-
tic  for  .  .  .  Asian  countries  that  have  subscribed  to  a  par-
ticular  ideology  to  come  out  with  the  proposal  to   mediate."
—When  asked  about  Thai-Filipino  "Asia  peace"  proposals
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F  .Stone's  Weekly,  September  26, 1966
Ike  Would  Use  A-Bombs  "Where  . . .  Life  Seems  to  Be Cheap"
(Continued  from  Page   One)
as  was  the   1964   campaign.
The   Mekong   Delta,   where   the  bulk  of   South  Vietnam's
people  live,  has  until  now  been   the   scene  of   little  fighting
and   much   tacit   agreement   between   the  Viet   Cong  and   the
government   forces.   Richard  Fryklund,  just  back  from  Saigon,
reports  in  the'  Washington   Star   (Sept.  15)   talk  of  adding
another  four  or  five  divisions  to  the  six  already  in   Vietnam
so  we   can   take   over   the   war   in   the   Delta,   too.     In   that
densely   populated    area—unlike   the   jungle   highlands—this
would   be  not  just  another  escalation  but  a  new  war—a  war
against  the  South  Vietnamese  people.   Its  human  cost  in  their
casualties  and  ours  would  be enormous.   We  dare  not  acquiesce
in   such   a  crime.   We   ought   to  be  for  ending  the  bombing
of  the  North  and  de-escalating the  war  in  the  South  while  we
offer  to  negotiate  with  the  Viet  Cong  as U  Thant  has proposed.
I  am  convinced   that  were  peace  negotiated   along  these   lines
both  North  and  South  Vietnam  would  be  taking  U.S.  aid  and
friendly  to  the  U.S.  within  a  few  years.
A  Bigger  Bang  for  A  Buck  Against  Asians
Either   we   move   toward   peace   or   we   continue   to   move
toward  catastrophe.   No  "middle  way"  is  any  longer  possible.
The  strategy  of  limiting  the  war  to  the  South  means  a  long,
painful   struggle  which  will  only  increase  impatience  at  home
for  quick  and  easy  bombing  solutions.   Nixon's   campaign  to
end    it   without  "appeasement"  or   more   ground   troops  may
have   a  dreadful  corollary:  the   use  of   the   atom   bomb   as  a
short-cut.    Poor   wobbly  old  Eisenhower  was  trotted   out   on
educational  TV  last  Monday  night  to  say  that  he  was  ready
in   1953  to  use  nuclear  weapons  to  end  the  Korean   war  and
to.imply  that  we  ought  to  do  the  same  in  Vietnam.     "We'd
have  won  the  war  in  a  week  if  we'd  had  to  use  them,"  Eisen-
hower   said,  like  any  Air   Force   Strangelove.    Of   course,   he
explained,  "no  one  in  a  sane  moment"  would  use  them  against
Russia—Russia  can  hit  back—but  that  doesn't  mean  that   "in
sticky   situations  you  couldn't   use   a   proper   [sic]   kind   of
nuclear  weapon   sometime",   i.e.  against  those  who  can't.   Ike
didn't  "see   any  difference  between  gas  warfare  and  this  kind
of  warfare."    In  his  fuzzy   logic,  if  one  can  be   press-agented
Plus  Qa  Change
Like  the  Diem regime,  the  new  Constituent  Assembly
in  South  Vietnam  is  heavily  weighted   on  the  side  of
the  Catholics,  the  military  and  landed  interests.    Ray-
mond   Coffey    of   the   Chicago   Daily   News    reported
(Wash.  Post,   Sept.  14)  that  30  of  the  117  seats  were
won  by  Catholics,  who  make  up  about  10%  of  the  pop-
ulation  while  the  Buddhists,  who  make  up  80%  won
only  34  seats.    Among  the  Buddhist  winners  only  two
or  three  were  considered  opponents  of  the  Saigon  gov-
ernment.  On the  other hand the  Catholics  were  strongly
pro-war.   The  30  Catholics  elected   are  just  nine  short
of  the  one-third  (30)   required  to  give  the  military  the
veto  they  need  for  the  Assembly.    The  junta  will  have
no  trouble  in  getting  those  votes;  18  military  men  and
18  civil  servants  were  elected.    Only  two  regular  par-
ties,   both  of  the  far  right,  have  emerged  from   these
carefully   screened   elections,  the  Vietnamese   Kuomin-
tang  (10)  and  the  Dai  Viet  (8).    Both  are  reactionary
parties  of  the  distant  past.    "Some  of  the   generals,"
Charles  Mohr  reflected  in  the  New  York  Times   Sept.
17,  "may  be  considerably  more  liberal  than  many  of
the   assembly  members  on  such  questions  as   land  re-
form.  .  .  ."    We  add  one  more  statistic  for  those  who
doubt   that  this  is   a  civil  war:  of   the   117  members,
32  are  from  the  North.   The  proportion of  Northerners
in  the  Assembly  is  far   higher  than  the  claimed  pro-
portion  of  Northern  troops  among  the  VC.
as  humane,  why  not   the  other?    Eisenhower   argued   against
"the  fear  of  using  a  weapon  that  the  free  world   might  need
in  some  outlying place  where  people  or  life  seems  to  be  cheap,
and   they  want  to  have  their  way,"  while  we—he  of   course
did   not   add—want   to   have   ours.    The   mere   suggestion   is
enough  to  deepen  racial  suspicion  in  Asia.
The   Eisenhower   interview  may  prove   the  beginning   of  a
campaign  to  sell  "proper"  kinds  of  nuclear  weapons  in  "little"
wars   like  Vietnam.    Johnson's   policy  at   the   moment   looks
like  a  lesser  evil,  as he  did  beside  Goldwater  in  1964.    But  his
"middle  way"   soon   turned  into  exactly  that  peace-by-quickie
bombardment   Goldwater   had   advocated.    The    Republicans
may  be  the  first  to  talk  of  nuclear  weapons   but  Johnson  may
be  the  first  to  use  them.   Something   better  than  opportunism
is  needed  to  keep  us  from  this  abyss.
We'll  Send  Free  Sample  Copies  of  This  Issue  to  Your   Friends  If  You  Send  Us Stamped,  Addressed  Envelopes—
I. F. Stone's Weekly
Please  renew   (or  enter)
Cf roof
City  .......................................
For   the  enclosed   $5  send
(To)   Name  ........................
Street
5618  Nebraska   Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.  C.  20015
a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
....  Zip..........State........
a  gift  sub  to:
City  ............................................  Zip..........State........
For   $5.35  extra  send  I.  F.  Stone's  The   Haunted
Indicate   if   announcement  wished  d
9/26/66
Fifties
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every   Monday   except  in  August,  the  last  week   in   December  and  the
first  week  in  January  and  Bi-Weekly  during  July  at   5618  Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..   Washington,  D.  C.    An   independent   weekly  published  and  edited
by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in   the   U.S.:    $6  in   Canada:    $10  elsewhere.     Air   Mail   rates:
JJ5  to  Europe;   J20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED