I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969jan27.pdf

============================================================

How  Fulbrigbt and   Young  Quizzed  Laird, Pgs.  2-3
Lines  Dedicated  To  Jan   Palach
Now  that  Soviet  man has  learned  to  walk in  space,  maybe     a  pt;neful  road  to  a  humane  socialism.     Space  flight,   once
he'll  learn  next  how  to  stand  erect  in  Prague  and  Moscow,     you  get  past  Sir  Isaac  Newton, is  a  triumph  of  hardware.
For  us  the  truer  pioneers  are  the  Czech  students  who  seek      We  prefer  the  struggle   to  let  the  human  spirit   soar.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
A/ool>l\i                        *^
VOL.    XVII,  NO.  2
JANUARY  27,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.20  CENTS
So What's  A  Little  Isaiah  Between  Friends?
The  Nixon  inaugural  must  have  set  a  record  for  the  num-
ber  of  invocations.   We  counted  four  before  Nixon   took  the
oath  and  one  afterward.    Indeed  it  might  be  said  there  -were
six,    for   Nixon's   own   inaugural  address   was   in   the   same
genre,   so  much  so  that  at  one  moment  when  our  attention
wandered  we  thought   Billy  Graham  had   been  elected  Presi-
dent.    From  Nixon's  first  reference  to  "the   majesty  of  this
moment"  to  that  peroration  in  which  he  urged  us  to  build  a
"cathedral   of   the   spirit"   we   realized   we   were   hearing   a
Golden  Treasury of  the  pulpit's  most  venerable purple  phrases.
The  Ministry  lost  what  the  country has  gained.
Add  The  Gospel  Gap
Isaiah  is  our  favorite  prophet.     Ordinarily  we  would  have
been  pleased  when  Nixon  let  it  be  known  that  he  would  take
the  oath  of   office   on  a  Bible  with  its  pages  open  to  Isaiah.
But  we  could  not  forget  that  Johnson—who   could  also  sound
like  Billy  Graham—started   out  by  leaning  heavily  on  Isaiah,
too.     His   favorite  quotation,   particularly   in   his   campaign
against  Goldwater,  was  Isaiah's  "come,  let  us  reason  together"
but  it  fell  into  disuse  after  he  began  bombing  North  Vietnam.
Nixon   chose  that  .page  of  Isaiah  in  which  the  Prophet   spoke
of  beating  swords  into  ploughshares.    This  would  be hearten-
ing  if  Nixon's  speeches  on  the  need  for  bigger  arms  spending
during  the  campaign,  and  his  choice  for  Secretary of  Defense,
did  not  seem  to  suggest  that  we  might  have  to  beat  plough-
shares  into  swords.     Melvin  Laird  hasn't   been  spending   his
years   on   the   House   Appropriations    defense   subcommittee
trying  to  sell  the  armed  services  on  Isaiah.    Laird  has  written
about  a  Strategy   Gap.     Nixon  has  spoken  about  a  Security
Gap,  a  Submarine  Gap  and  an  armament  Research  Gap.    Per-
haps  it  would  be  safest  to  put  this  Isaiah  incident  down  to  a
Rhetoric   Gap,    like   the   Gospel   Gap   which   enables    Billy
Graham  to  denounce  materialism—as  he  did  at  the  Inaugural
—while   remaining   a  favorite  spiritual   back-scratcher   of   the
pious   rich.
We  would  be  more  impressed  with  the  peaceful  sentiments
expressed   in   the  Nixon   inaugural  if   they  had   not   become
standard  fare.    Kennedy  and  Johnson,   too,   spoke  evangeli-
cally  in  their   Inaugurals   of   the  terrible  power   of   the   new
weaponry,  the  need   for  peace  and  for  diversion  of   resources
to  human  need.    Then  they  added  a  "but"   about  remaining
strong,  and  this—if  strength  can  be  measured  in  more  arms—
was  serious.     "Let  us  cooperate,"  Nixon  said,  "to  reduce  the
burden  of  arms.  .  .  .  But  to  all  those  who  would  be  tempted
by  weakness,  let  us  leave  no  doubt  that  we  will  be  as  strong
as we need  to  be.  .  .  ."    Kennedy,  too,  made  the  same  pledge
and   then   in   almost   the  same  words   added,   "We   dare  not
tempt   them   with  weakness."       Kennedy   proceeded   to   step
1  *
A  Self-Satire  of  The  Peace  Movement
If  the  CIA had set  out  to  produce  a  savage   burlesque
of  the  peace  movement,  it  could  not  have  done  better
than   the   counter-inaugural  staged   by   the   National
Mobilization  Committee—known  familiarly  and  all  too
accurately  as  "Mob."    There  were  the  good  people  in
it   who  turn  up  for  every   march,  and  there   were  de-
voted  young  people.    The  organizers,  David  Dellinger
and  Rennie  Davis,  are  impressive  in  private.   But  the
tone  was  set  by  kooks.   There  was  no dignity  and little
discipline.     In   the   circus   tent—a   most   appropriate
scene—for  the  rally  before  the  march,  there  was  one
moving   moment   when   an   armless   Vietnam   veteran
turned  up  from  Walter  Reed  hospital  to  make  a  plea
for  peace  which  was  all  the  more  effective   for  being
inarticulate.   But  this was  soon  wiped  out  when all  men
but  the  wounded  were  ordered  off  the  platform to make
way    for    the    "Women's    Liberation   Army."     Their
speakers  sounded  as  if  they  had  been  invented  by  Art
Buchwald   with   an   assist   from   Aristophanes.    Their
accusation  that  men  were  only  calling  for  revolution  to
get   power  for   themselves  was   met   by  obscene   jeers
from   the   male  audience  in   an   uproarious  climax  of
self-satire.     Nothing   could   have   looked   more  out  of
place  in  the  parade  which  followed  than  the  huge  por-
traits  of  Martin  Luther King, A.  J.  Muste and Gandhi,
all  apostles  of  non-violence  and  love,  carried  along  by
what  seemed  to  be  more  than  a  sprinkling  of   escaped
lunatics  filled  with  hate,  expressing   themselves  in  ob-
scenity  and  itching  to  fight  cops,  as  they  did  here  and
there  despite  the  valiant efforts  of  the  parade marshals.
up  the  arms  race  and  Nixon  is pledged  to  do  the  same.  Nixon
announces   an   era  of   negotiation   as  Johnson   promised    "we
will  be  unceasing  in  the  search  for  peace."    In  less  than  two
months  he  was bombing  North  Vietnam.    Henry  Cabot  Lodge
was  then  his  special   adviser  and  soon   to  be  Ambassador  in
Saigon  as he  will  now  be  Nixon's  at  the  Paris  talks.   Though
the  objective  circumstances  have  changed,  the  parallels  are  not
reassuring.
Our  Presidents   at  their  Inaugurals  have  all  come  to  sound
like  card-carrying members  of  the  Fellowship   for  Reconcilia-
tion.     It's   easier  to  make  war  when   you  talk  peace.     They
make  us  the  dupes  of  our  hopes,  as  the  newspaper   headlines
the  morning  after  inaugural  about  Nixon's  "sacred  commit-
ment"  attest.    Johnson,  too,  snowed  the  country  with  a similar
performance   when   he  went   up   on  Capitol  Hill  for   a  last
boast-in  and  sob-in  among  his  old  cronies,  those  aged  pygmies
in   aspic,   preserved   from   reality  by   the   gelatinous   mutual
flatteries  which  fill  the  Congressional   Record.    They  are  all
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January   27,1969
Laird's  Replies,   Though   Careful,  Indicate  A  Spiralling   Arms  Race  Lies  Ahead
How  Fulbright  Managed  to  Quiz Nixon's Appointee  As Secretary  of  Defense
In   an   unusual  move  which   may  set  a  precedent   for   the
future,   Senator  Fulbright  as  Chairman  of  the  Foreign  Rela-
tions  Committee  sent  a  letter  to  Chairman  Stennis of  Armed
Services  asking  the  latter  to  put  11 questions to  Melvin Laird.
Fulbright's  letter  recognized   that  Armed  Services  has primary
responsibility   for   nominations  to   Secretary  of   Defense   but
said   his   questions  were   justified   because   "many   aspects  of
military  and  foreign  policy  have  become  so  interrelated,"  and
his  were  "questions  which  may  not  be  raised  by  members of
your  committee."     That   was  sure.
The  Nuclear   Superiority   Will  O'The  Wisp
.The   first   four   questions   and   answers  indicate  that  Laird
still  believes  in  trying  to  maintain  nuclear  superiority.    Ful-
bright  first  asked  whether   Laird  thought   there  was  a  point
beyond   which   increases   in   weaponry   merely   increased   the
dangers  of  war.   Laird  replied  that  he  believed  in maintaining
"a  superior  military  position  that  is  clear  for  all  to  see"  and
that  this  would  decrease  the  danger  of  war.    Past  arms  races
provide  proof   to  the  contrary.
Fulbright   then   asked  whether  the  U.S.   could   not  achieve
greater   security  through  arms  control  arrangements  such  as
a  pact  not  to  build  an  ABM.    Laird  replied  that  he  hoped  for
such  arrangements  but  thought  they  could  be  reached  only  if
we   dealt   "from   a   position   of   superior   nuclear   strength."
Question No.  3 asked  whether Laird  thought  the  Soviets would
allow  us  to  build  stronger  nuclear  forces  without  striving  to
keep  up.    Laird  replied  that  we  should   seek  a  superior  posi-
tion  "with  the  understanding  that  the  Soviet  Union  will  in
all  likelihood  continue  to  make  strenuous  efforts   to  improve
its  own  strategic  position."     This  means  an  endless   race  in
armament  accompanied by increased  tension.   When  Fulbright
asked  whether  the  U.S.  should   "put  more  emphasis  on  arms
control   matters",   Laird   replied   that   the   U.S.   has  already
"placed  maximum  feasible  emphasis"  on  arms  control.    Few
advocates  of  arms  control  or  arms  reduction  would   agree.
Question  5  pointed  out  that  the  U.S.  had  spent  about  $3.5
billion   in   foreign  exchange  on   military   deployment  abroad
and  asked  whether  Laird  thought  this  could  be  reduced  ap-
preciably.    Laird  thought   it  should   "wherever  possible"   but
"without  jeopardizing  the  security  of  the  U.S.  and  its  allies  or
accepting  any  expansion  [our  italics]  either  of  the  Russian  or
Chinese  position  or  threat."    This  looks  like  a  Pax Americana
formula.     Laird   said  NATO   must   be   strengthened.      "In
Asia,"   he  added,   "a  resolution  in  Vietnam  which  may  not
come  as  soon  as we  would  hope  but  should  be  achieved  in  due
course  will  certainly  reduce  expenditures  there."    This  is  not
too  hopeful.
Question   6  asked  whether  the  U.S.   military   should   help
suppress  revolutionary uprisings  and  whether  it  made  any dif-
ference   to  Laird  if   the  uprisings  were  led   by  Communists.
Laird  replied   that  it  made  no  difference  and  that  "the   U.S.
military  should  have  no  role  in  'suppressing'   genuine  domes-
tic  revolutionary  uprisings."     But  then.Laird  added  that  this
did   not   exclude   U.S.   "military  assistance  if  the  uprising  is
Dietetic   Note   For  The  Nixon   Era
Nixon's  choice  of  Philip  Campbell  to  be   Undersecre-
tary  of  Agriculture  should  give  pause  to  everyone  but
vegetarians.    As  a  representative  of  the  meat  industry-
oriented  National  Assn.  of  State  Depts.  of   Agriculture,
Campbell  vigorously  opposed  the  1967  Meat   Inspection
Act,  which  he  will  now  be  largely   responsible   for  im-
plementing.    During  the  same  hearings  at  which  Camp-
bell   testified,  it   was   brought   out   that   state   govern-
ments   had   been   abysmally   lax   in   maintaining   clean
meat   standards   within  its    jurisdictions—Pennsylvania,
for   example,   had   1,530   nonfederally    inspected    meat
facilities  but  only  bothered  to  inspect  46  of  these.  Yet
Campbell  opposed  the  Federal  Government's  stepping  in
on  the  grounds   that  it  would  tend  to  discourage   state
initiative!     Under   the   Mondale-Montoya   compromise
bill   which   was   finally   passed,   the  states   have   until
December   1969   to   meet   federal   inspection    standards.
With  Campbell  in  office   we'd  better  eat  blintzes  to  be
on  the  safe  side.
aided  from  outside  the  country,  the  government  in  question
requests  our  help  and  our  national  interests  an;  directly  and
vitally   involved."     This   is   broad   enough   for   intervention
from  Greece  to  Latin  America.
In  Question  7 Fulbright  asked whether  there was a  need  "to
review  our  counter-insurgency  doctrine  and  the  policy  under-
lying  it"  as  a  result  of  Vietnam.    The  Laird  reply  indicated
that  he  thought  the  lessons  should  be used  to  improve  counter-
insurgency  rather  than  scrap  it.
A  Slippery  Reply  on  Military  "Seminars"
Question  8  was  easy,  whether  Laird  favored  strengthening
the  peace-keeping  potential  of  the  UN.    He  said  he  did.    In
Question  9  Fulbright  asked  whether  Laird  thought  the  Penta-
gon  should  carry  out  public  indoctrination  programs  in  foreign
policy.    Laird's  reply  was  slippery.
"An   unimpeded  flow  of   unclassified   information  to   the
American  public  about   defense  matters  is  necessary,"  Laird
wrote,  answering  a  totally  different  question  from  that  raised
by  Fulbright,  "if  the  people  are  to  understand  the  issues,  to
form  their  opinions,  and  to  judge  the  defense  policies  of  the
Administration."    But  then  he  added,  "I  suppose  this  could
be  called  'education'  to  a  degree.    I  do  not  believe  it  can cor-
rectly  be  called  'indoctrination'."    This  dodges  the  question of
the   military  seminars  which   McNamara   stopped   in   March
1961   after  Fulbright  exposed   them  as  a  way  to  let  the  mili-
tary  brain-wash  the  country.
In  answer  to  the  tenth  question  Laird  said  he  was  opposed
to having the  Pentagon  sponsor  social  science  research  on  non-
military   matters.     Such   projects   have   been   the   target   of
another  Fulbright  campaign.    Finally  Laird  agreed  with  Ful-
bright  that  public  concern  about  the  military-industrial com-
plex  was  justified.    Judging  from  what  the military-industrial
journals  are  saying  about  Laird,  he  must have  smiled  when  he
wrote  that.
Navy  League  Head  Thinks  America  Can Rule  The  Waves  With  Laird  In  The  Pentagon
"His   [Laird's]  selection  to  be  the  civilian  defense   leader
is   fortuitous,   for   out  of   the  election   of   1968  and  beyond
Vietnam,   the  U.S.   must   adopt  a  new  grand  strategy   that
will  assure  our  supremacy   for  the  century  ahead  .  .  .  the
new  Secretary  of  Defense  understands   the  true  significance
of   strength.     His  constant   reminder   of   the  necessity  for
strategic  initiative  bears  out  this  thesis."
—Chas. F.  Duchein,  president  of  the  Navy   League  in  the
January   issue  of  its  organ,  Navy.   Inserted   by  GOP  Major-
ity  Leader  Ford  in  the  Congressional  Record  Jan.  14.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  27, 1969
Strange  Silence  From  Press  and  Congress  As  Goldwaterite  Goes  to  The  Pentagon
Sharp  Questioning  By Young  of Ohio  Shows  Little  Change  in  Laird's Views
If   a  Cabinet  appointee  had  written  a  book   only  six  years
ago  as  far   to  the   left   as  Melvin  Laird's  "Strategy  Gap:   A
House  Divided"   (Regnery:  1962)   is to  the  right,  one  may be
sure  there  would  be  an  uproar  in  Congress  and   the  press.
This  was  a  Goldwater   blueprint   two  years  before   the  Gold-
water  campaign  in   1964.     Yet   in  a  country  which  rejected
Goldwaterism  overwhelmingly as too  dangerous just  four  short
years  ago,  there  is  little  protest  when  Nixon  names  a  leading
Goldwaterite  of   1964   to  be  Secretary  of  Defense   in    1968.
The   publications   of   the  military-industrial   complex   are  de-
lighted  with  Laird's  record  and  views.   The  liberals  look  the
other  way.   The  New  York   Times   (Jan.  19)  even  published
an  editorial  assessing  the  new  Administration  on  the  eve  of
its  inaugural  without  even  mentioning  Laird!
Except  for  Fulbright,  the  only  other  Senator  to  raise  ques-
tion  about  Laird  before  his  name  reached  the  Senate  floor  was
Stephen   M.  Young,   the  Ohio   Democrat,   the  only  maverick
on   the   Senate   Armed   Services  Committee.     His   time  was
limited  and  the  atmosphere  was not  conducive to  sharp exami-
nation,  so  Laird  was  able  to  be  skilfully  elusive.
Ike  Too  Soft  For  Laird
Young  began  by  asking  Laird  about  those  passages  in  his
book  where  he  criticized  Eisenhower  for  inaction  in  the  East
German  rising  of  1953  and  in  the  Hungarian   revolt  of   1956,
and  criticized  Kennedy  for  backing  away  at  the  Bay  of   Pigs.
Young  wanted  to  know  what  Laird  would  have  suggested  if
he  had  been  Secretary  of  Defense  then.    Laird  replied   that
he   did   not   think   this  would   be   "useful"    because  we  had
moved  from  an  era  of  confrontation   to  one  of   negotiation,
the  favorite  cliche  of  the  Nixon  administration.    But  what  if
accident  or  design   bring  us  to  new  confrontations?
Laird's  book  advocated  that  we  serve  "credible  notice"  on
the  Soviet  Union  that  we  reserve  the  right  to  strike  first  "when
the  Soviet  peril  point  rises  beyond  its  tolerable  limit",  adding
"the   tolerable   limit  would   not  of  course  be  too  tightly  de-
fined."     Young   wanted   to  know  whether   the  recent   Czech
invasion,  Hungary  in  1956,   Berlin  in  1961   or  Cuba  in   1962
would   have   been   a   such   a  point,   justifying  a   first  strike.
Laird  dodged  the  question  by  saying  his  view  derived  from  a
unanimous  report  by  the  House  Defense   appropriations  sub-
committee  of  April  I960  in which  he  had  joined.   This  called
for  a  pre-emptive  strike  "should  it  ever  become  obvious  that
an  attack  upon  us  or  our  allies  is  imminent."    Since  none  of
the   cases   Young   cited,   except   that   of   Berlin,   involved   a
Western  ally,  the  answer  was  hardly   responsive.
Young  then  read  that  passage  in  which  Laird  wrote—
On  the  day  that  the  Soviet  Union  feels  there  is  indeed  a
balance  of  power,  nuclear  war  will  become  not  only thinkable
but  in  all   likelihood  inevitable,  and  that  should  the  Soviet
Union  begin  to  approach  real  nuclear  parity,  we  could  not
win  a  nuclear  war  but  the  Communists would.
The  U.S.  and  the  Soviet  Union  are  now  approaching  parity  in
the  number  of  ICBM's.   Does  Laird  still  think  such  a  balance
of  power  makes  nuclear  war  likely,  and  does  he  still  think  the
Communists—by   some   magic   formula—can   win   a   nuclear
war  when  we  cannot?    Young  did  not  follow  up  with  these
questions.
Laird  provided  a  direct  denial  for  the  first  time  to  Young's
next   question,   which  involved  the  view  he  expressed   in  the
book  that  the  Soviets  would   "use   every  trick  and   strategem
to  beguile  us  into  sacrificing our  time  and  efforts  to  hope  of
Dangerous  Fellow
Toward   the   close   of   the   Senate   Armed   Services
Committee  hearing  Jan.  15,  Senator  Strom  Thurmond
asked  David  Packard  about  an  interview  Nixon's  choice
for   Deputy   Secretary  of   Defense   gave   Chemical  and
Engineering  News  last  Nov. 25.   In  it  Packard declared
that   while  he   was   opposed  to   the  sale   of   strategic
goods,   he   thought   "a   larger   volume   of   East-West
trade"   would   "contribute   to   better   understanding."
Thurmond,  a  Reserve  Major  General  and  the   Dixiecrat
candidate  for  President  in  1948,  said  he  himself   was
"of  the  school"  that  opposed  "trade  with  the  enemy"
of   any   kind.     Thurmond   wanted  to  be  assured  that
"this  particular  question"  would  be  left  to  the  White
House  and  that   Packard  did  not  intend  to  press   his
own  views.    Packard  avoided  giving  such   assurance.
He  said  he  "firmly"  believed  there  should  be  no  trade
with  the  enemy  "which  would support  his  capability in
a  future  confrontation."   But  then  he  added,  "I  think
at   the   same   time   this   world  faces   the  proposition
wherein  there  may  be  some  changes  in  attitude   that
would  favor  a  better  accommodation, and  I  think  the
tremendous  amounts  of  money  that  are  being  spent  in
the   world  today  for  armaments  could,  if   it   could  be
arranged  without  jeopardizing  in  any  way  the  security
of  the country, [sic]  I  think  the  country would  be better
off   if  we  had  some  of  these  funds  applied  to  some  of
the  very  important  social   and  other  priorities  of   the
citizens."   Thurmond did  not  press  Packard  to  expand
his   views   on   arms   reduction.     But   we   can   easily
imagine  the  Republican  from   South  Carolina  wonder-
ing  where  Nixon  got  that  pinko with  $300,000,000 who
sounded  like  Cyrus Eaton.
disarmament."    Laird  denied  that  this  meant  he  would  oppose
the  non-proliferation  treaty  or  asume  that  we  should  make  no
further  efforts  to  negotiate   disarmament.
Young  was  allowed  some  more  questions  at  the  committee's
second   session   Jan.   15.    Laird  said  he  was  still  dubious  of
the  Soviet  peaceful   co-existence  policy,  and  of  the   supposed
rift  between  China  and  Russia  though  he  thought  we  should
exploit  it.    Young  read  passages  in  which  Laird  spoke  of  the
moral   obligation   of   the   U.S.   to   take  the   initiative  against
Communism  "in  all  areas  while  we  have  it."     Young  asked,
"Now   by  this  do  you  mean  that  you  feel  the  U.S.  has  a man-
date  from  Almighty  God  to  police  the  entire world?"    Laird
replied,  "No  I  don't  meant  that."
Laird  said  his  aim  in  Vietnam  was  self-determination  by
free  elections.    He  was  not  asked  about  the  rigged   elections
which   brought   the   present   Saigon   government   into   being.
Young   asked  what  Laird  meant  when  he  wrote  we  should
"give  priority  to  the  national   security  budget,  and  spend  on
non-defense  only  amounts  which  will  not  sacrifice  the  stability
of  the  dollar."     In  reply  Laird  insisted  that  national  security
must  have  priority,  claimed  that  in  the  House  he  had   helped
to  boost  the  health,  education  and  welfare budget   "percentage-
wise"  even  more  than   the  Pentagon's   and  said  "we   cannot
satisfy  our  military leaders  at  all  times."    Young  asked  about
reports  that  Laird  had  doubts  about  a  "thick"  ABM  system.
Laird  said  he  "wanted   to  look  that  over  very  carefully,"  be-
fore  going  ahead.    Young's  last  question  dealt  with  passages
which  inferentially criticized  Fulbright   for  objecting  to  Gen-
eral  Walker's  methods  in  indoctrinating  U.S.  troops  in  West
Germany.    Young   pointed  out  that  Walker  gave  the  troops
John  Birch  material.    Laird  said  "I  would  not  support  that."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  27,1969
Johnson  Is  Filling  Every  Military  "Gap" Nixon  Mentioned  In  the  Campaign
(Continued  from  Page   One)
g-r-e-a-t   statesmen,   like   Lyndon   and   Sam   and   Gerry   and
what's-his-name.    The  surprise was  not  the  last performance
of   Johnson-playing-Lionel-Barrymore-playing-Lyndon  but   the
fact  that  he  got  away  with  it;  the  press  by  and  large  acted
like  sob-sisters in  the  1890s  covering  a  society ball  to  help  the
poor.    Amid  the   sniffles   no  one  was  so  uncouth  as  to  peep
into  Johnson's  fantastic  exaggerations,  like  his  claim  to  be
spending  $68  billion  "for  such things as health  and  education"
the  next  fiscal year.   More  than  $35  billion  of  this  is  normal
expenditure  from  social  security, where  the  government  takes
in  more  from  the  lower  brackets  than  it   pays  out  and  the
munificence   is   attested   by  Johnson's   proposal   to   raise  the
minimum  from  $55  to  $80  a  month,  just  enough   to  keep  a
beneficiary   from   dying   too   visibly.
The  Blacks Will Pay  Twice
Johnson,  too, talked  of  peace  but  it  will  be  years  before
we  stop  paying  all  the  costs—fiscal  and  social—of   his  Viet-
nam war.   He  said  it was "imperative  ...    to  resist inflation".
But  it  wasn't  imperative  enough  for  him  to  impose  taxes  on
the  profits  his  war  inflation  created   in  the  upper   brackets.
The  poor  and  the  black  will  now  pay  with  unemployment  to
fight  that  inflation,  as  they  paid  disproportionately  with  their
lives  to  fight  his  war.    He,  too, talked  of  the  need  "to  scale
down   the   level   of   arms  among   the   superpowers"   so  that
"mankind"   could   "view   the   future   without   fear   and   great
apprehension."    But  he  may have  set off a  new  spiral when  he
approved  the  "thin" anti-ballistic missile.   And  new arms  for  a
fantastically  overarmed  nation  take  first  priority  in  his  final
budget.
In  the  masterly flim-flam of  budgetary  accounting,  the  new
estimates  gloss  over  the  fact  that  the  war  this  year  will  cost
$3  billion  more  than  we  were  told  before.    A  $3.4 billion
decline  is  promised  next  year  (largely  due  to  the  saving  on
planes  and  explosives  if  we  continue   to  stop  bombing  the
North).  But  the  savings are already whisked away in  a $4 bil-
lion  increase  in  arms  expenditures  in  the  year  beginning  July
1.   Total  military spending  will  be  $81.5  billion,  nosing  past
the  peak  of  World  War  II—how's  that  for  Isaiah!
The  poverty  program  remains  just  short  of  $2  billion  but
arms  research  and  development  will  go  up  $850  million  to  a
total  of  $5.6 billion,   including   work   on   such   new  goodies
as  missiles  which  can  be  hidden  on  the  ocean   floor.   There's
Here  Lies  Gene:  Recquiescat  Sed  Non  In  Pace
On  receiving  the  Eleanor   Roosevelt  peace  prize  re-
cently  from  the  National Committee for  A  Sane  Nuclear
Policy,  Senator  McCarthy  called  for  a  vigorous  exami-
nation  by  the  Senate  of  Cabinet  appointments   especi-
ally  for  State  and  Defense.   But  on  January   20  there
was  no  word  of  protest  from  McCarthy  when  Teddy
Kennedy  as  majority  whip moved  that  the  Senate  con-
firm  all  Nixon's  Cabinet  appointees  without  debate  ex-
cept  Hickel  for  Secretary  of  the  Interior.   Laird's  ap-
pointment  as  Secretary  of 'Defense   is  cheered  by  the
military-industrial   complex  whose  influence  McCarthy
deplored   in  the   Saturday   Review.    Four   years  after
Goldwater's  defeat,  the  man  who  chaired  the  commit-
tee  which  wrote  his  platform  has  been  confirmed  with-
out   objection   as   Secretary  of   Defense.     The  Senate
took  only  21  minutes  to  rubber-stamp   all  Nixon's   ap-
pointments  but  Hickel.   The  spectacle  proves McCarthy
was  right   when  he  said  Teddy   as  whip  would   make
little  difference.  But  it  also  condemns  McCarthy.  How'
build  an  opposition  around  a  man  who  doesn't   give  a
damn,  a  dilettante  in  politics  as  in  poetry?
not  a  gap  Nixon  mentioned  that  the  Johnson  military  budget
does  not  fill—a  "new generation"   of  missiles  (how  beauti-
fully  they  breed!)   with  multiple  warheads,  five  squadrons  of
new  FBHI  bombers  (to  keep  Fort  Worth  and  General  Dy-
namics  prosperous),  $2.4  billion  to  give  the  Navy  three  fast
new  nuclear  attack  submarines,   the  quiet  variety'which  won't
disturb  sleep  in  the  ghettoes.    There  is  more  money  for  the
Air  Force's   advanced  bomber.    Just  to  make  sure  we  don't
run  out  of  new  Vietnams  there's  three-quarters  of  a  billion
this  year  and  a  billion  next  for  those  overpriced  C5A  carrier
planes  which  can  get  troops  fast  to  any  new  trouble  spot  and
millions  more  for  three  of  those  Fast  Deployment    Logistics
ships  which  will  take  the  place  of  foreign   bases  and   have
heavy  equipment   ready  for  the  troops  when  the  C5A's  get
them  there.   Even a submissive and  somnolent  Congress  several
years  running  has  turned  down  the  DPLs  as  an  engraved  in-
vitation  to  more  trouble  but  Johnson's   budget  asks  Congress
to  come  and  reason  together  with  him  again  about  the  item.
No  wonder  this  is  a  smooth  transition.   It's practically  one
continuous   performance,   and  better  than   ever  for  the  Penta-
gon.    So what's  a  little  Isaiah  between  friends?
We'll  Be Clad to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
For  th
A Tim
(To)   ]
Street
City
Please
Name
Street
City
5618
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
e  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
e of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
Zip                State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished   d
renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for   the   enclosed  $5
Zip                State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                  V2V69
Nebraska Ave,  N. W., Washington,  D. C. 20015
/  E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska  Ave., N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second  Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.  D.  C.    Published  every  other  Monday at  5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington.  D. C.
An  independent weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.; S6 in   Canada;
$10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED