I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969dec01.pdf

============================================================

Behind  That  Optimistic  Report  to Nixon  on  Vietnam, P.  3
The  Easiest  Bloodbath  To  "Prevent"  Is  The  One  We  Ourselves  Are  Carrying On
"The  whole concept  of  Vietnamization  is  wrong.  What  we
have  to  be  aiming  for  is  to  get  the  fighting  stopped.  I have
very   little  patience   with   the   people   who  talk   about   the
massacre  that  may  happen at  some  future  date  if  we with-
draw,  because  there's  a  massacre  going  on  now."
—Averell  Hai~riman at  Johns  Hopkins,  November  H.
I. F, Stone's  Weekly
J\7fttti    DllhlirlstOfl     ~Ri-.\\fool>l\\                          •^
Now  Published  Bi-  Weekly
VOL.  XVII,  NO.  22
DECEMBER  1,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Bitter  Battles  Lie  Ahead
From  my  days  as  an  editorial writer  on  one  of  the  few  pro-
New  Deal  papers  in  the  country,  I  remember how  bitterly the
Democrats  complained  about  the   hostility  of   the   press   and
radio;  they  portrayed Roosevelt  as  a  dangerous revolutionary.
When  he  won  his  landslide victory  in  1936  it  was  over  their
overwhelming  opposition.  We   felt  as  the  Nixon   crowd   does
now  that  the  news media were  one-sided,  but  there  are crucial
differences   between  the  two  periods.  Poor   people   don't   own
newspapers.  The   news  media  now   as  then   are   in  wealthy,
mostly  conservative and  largely  Republican .hands.  It  takes  a
lot  of  steam  in  the  boiler  before they turn  against a  Republican
President.  Their  growing  opposition   testifies   to  the  unpopu-
larity  of  the war  and  the  spreading suspicion that  Nixon  wants
to  hang   on,  whatever  the  cost,  until  he  can  get   a  political
victory.  Nixon  might  as well  complain  about  the  unfairness  of
the   stock  market.  It   has   been  going   down   steadily  since  it
sized  up  the  Nov.  3  speech  as the  signal  for  a  prolonged  war.
Nothing  Huntley  ever  said  to  Brinkley is  as  subversive  as  the
Dow-Jones  ticker.  Wall  Street—the  citadel  of  the  GOP—has
lost  confidence in  Nixon  and  in  Nixon's  war.
As In The Athens of Papadapoulos
Nixon's  real  complaint  is  that  the  news  media  don't  agree
with  him.  Since  the  First  Amendment  doesn't  require  the  press
to  agree  with  the  President,  he  doesn't   dare  say  this  openly
and   instead   charges   unfairness.  It   is  remarkable  how   little
evidence  of  this  the  Administration  is  able  to  cite,  after  gath-
ering   transcripts  from   every  TV   station  on  what   they  said
about  the  Nov.   3  speech.  When  Agnew—Nixon's    Papadap-
oulos   and   official   cleanser  of   the  U.S.   media—went  on   TV
ten  days  later  all  he  could   offer   was  a  scurrilous  attack  on
Averell  Harriman  and  a  colorful  but  curiously  vague  bill  of
particulars.  He   complained  about   "a   raised  eyebrow,  an  in-
flection  of  the  voice,  a  caustic  remark  dropped  in  the  middle
of  a  broadcast."  What  caustic  remark?  What  insidious  inflec-
tion?  Whose  raised  eyebrow?  Couldn't   Klein  find  anything
more  specific?  Is  this  Athens  where  the  cops  even  watch  eye-
brows ?
Equally  feeble  in  its  vagueness  was  Agnew's  attack  a  week
later  on the  New  York  Times  and  the  Washington  Post. You'd
think   Agnew   could   do  better   than   complaining   about   one
story  which  missed  the  early  edition  and  that  the  Pope's  sup-
port  for  Nixon  made  page  11  instead  of  page  1,  Is  that  all
the  White  House  researchers  could  find?  Agnew  was  so  des-
perate   he   made   like   a   liberal   at   one   point   and   attacked
"monopolization   of  the  news."  We  welcome  him  to  the  fold.
But  neither   New  York  nor  Washington   are   one-newspaper
towns.  In  New  York  the  pro-Nixon  Daily  News  circulation  is
far  bigger  than  the  Times  and  the  Post  combined.   In  Wash-
Not  Since  Marie  Antoinette
For  sheer  balderdash  it  would  be  difficult   to   exceed
Herbert  G.  Klein's  estimate:  "Had  it  not  been  for  the
highly  effective  work  of  the  Washington  police,  of  the
National  Guard  .  .  .  for  the  reserve  forces   of  the  De-
fense  Department  and  the  complete  cooperation  of  all
elements  of  the  government  .  .  .  the  damage  to  Wash-
ington   (Saturday  night  and  the  night  before)   would
have  been far  greater  than ...    the riots  after  the death
of  Martin  Luther  King." .  .  .  Does  anyone  seriously  be-
lieve  that  Washington's  undermanned police  force  could
contain  5,000  or  50,000  or  150,000  demonstrators  bent
on  violence?  .  .  .  (T)he  Nixon  administration was  less
interested  in  trying  to  keep  the  march peaceful  than  in
trying  to  make it  seem  less  large  and more  violent  than
it  really  was,  and  in  trying  to  scare  the  daylights  out
of  thai  putative  Silent  Majority.  .  .  .  On  Saturday and
Sunday,   the  President  by  his   own   account   was  pre-
occupied  with  the  football  games.  It  was  a  fine  after-
noon  for  watching  football,  he  is  quoted  as  saying  on
Saturday,  and  for  sheer   piquancy,  we  have  not  heard
the  likes  of  that  since  Marie  Antoinette.
—Washington  Post, Nov.  18.
ington,  both  the  Daily  News  and  the  Star  are  conservative  and
pro-Nixon   (as  is  the  Washington  Post  quite  often,  most  re-
cently  on  Haynsworth  and,  alternate  days,  on  his  war  policy).
It  is true  that  just  three  days after  Agnew  spoke  a Washington
paper  had  the  impudence  to  write—
From  the  first  announcement   of  the  Mobilization  plans,
the  Administration  reacted  by  building  a  wall  of   indiffer-
ence   and  hostility   between   itself   and  the  demonstrators.
The  opposition   was  generally  classified  as  the   product  of
either  stupidity  or  subversion.  There  was  little  attempt  to
reason,  and  a  massive  effort  at  rejection.
But  that  was  an  editorial  in  the  conservative  Star  (Nov. 23).
We  are  seeing  a  marriage  of  paranoias.   Nixon  has  always
felt  (remember  his  outburst  after  he  lost  the  Governorship  in
California)   that  the  media   were   against   him.   The   military
and   its  supporters  in  the  State  Department  and  the  White
House  have^een  grumbling   about  press  coverage  ever  since
the   Vietnam   intervention    began.   The   animosity   deepened
every  time  the  reporters  were  proven  right  and  the  Generals
wrong.  The  baldest  and  most  recent  expression of  the  bureauc-
racy's  delusions  came  when  Gen.  Walt  of  the  Marines  told  a
press  conference  in  Danang  (Washington  Post,  Nov.  23)  that
the  war  would   have  been   over   a  year  ago  if  the   American
people   had   supported   Lyndon   Johnson!  He   criticized    the
news  media  for  failing  to  present  a  "positive"  picture  of  the
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Dec.  1, 1969
STOCK   MARKETS   IN   TOKYO   AND  NEW   YORK   the   week
Nixon  and  Sato  reached  their  Okinawa  agreement  provided  a
lesson  in  militarism and  imperialism.  Stripped   of  empire,   un-
der  a  Constitution  which  renounces  war  and  regular  armies,
Japan   has  become   the  third  biggest   industrial  power,   second
only  to  the  U.S. in  the  "free  world."  Tokyo's  booming   stock
exchange  set  a  historic  high;  for  the  first  time  average   stock
values  rose   above  2,200  yen. Here,   burdened  with  the  costs
of  empire,  including  the  policing  of   Asia,  the  stock  market
has  been  plummeting   in  despair  over  runaway  inflation   and
the  Vietnamese  war  that  caused  it.  The  Dow  Jones   index  of
industrials  fell  to  823, a  loss  of  26.13 in  one  week.  Nixon
wants  Japan   to  rearm   and   to  share  the  burden   of   policing
Asia.  The  Okinawa  agreement  brings  that  closer  by  allowing
U.S.  bases  in  Japan  to  be  used  for  Asian  wars.  We  are  edging
Japan  toward  the  use  of  nuclear  weapons.  What  if  these  are
turned  against  us?  Last  time  there  was  a  militaristic  Japan  it
claimed   to  be  policing  Asia  against  Communism.   But  when
it  struck,   it  struck  at  Pearl   Harbor.   What   folly   to  invite  a
repetition!
Take  SALT  With  A  Grain Of...
THE   PRESS   Is   FULL   OF  EUPHORIC   NONSENSE   about   the
Strategic   Arms   Limitation   Talks   in   Helsinki.   The    test   is
MIRV,   which  we  are  already  installing  in  our  nuclear sub-
marines.  If  Nixon  believed  in  arms  limitation,  he  would  have
opened  the  Helsinki  talks with  a  proposal  for  a  halt  in  MIRV
testing.  By the  time  the  second  round  of  talks  begin  in Vienna,
it  will  probably  be  too  late.  The   stage  is  set  for  a  new  and
expensive  upward  spiral  in  the  arms  race.
DESPITE  HEAVY  DELETIONS  BY  THE   PENTAGON  CENSORS
—one  deletion   is  14  pages  long—the   newly  released   execu-
tive  session  testimony taken  by the  Symington  subcommittee  on
our  commitments  to  the  Philippines  contains  some  basic revela-
tions.  One   is  the  ludicrous  character  of   the  supposed   threats
against  which  we  have  been  giving  the  Philippines  an  average
$22.5  million  a year  for  the  past  five  years.  Admiral  Kauffman
admitted  the  threat  from  China  was  "very   small,"   and  was
even  "loath"  to  admit  there  was  a  serious  Communist  threat
inside  the  country.  The  total  armed  men  of  the  Huks,  in  three
separate  groups,   is  given   as  400   and   their   "mass  base"  as
30,000  to  35,000—out  of   a  population   of   37  million.  En-
counters  with  the  Huks  from  January  1968 through   August
1969   cost   the  Philippine   armed   forces   18  dead.   If   the   in-
ternal  menace  grows,  it  will  not  be  for  lack  of  arms  but  for
Why  Land  Reform  Lags  In  Saigon
Among  the  landowners  who  were  once  ready  to  sup-
port  the  plan,  including  many  who  either  are  members
of  the  Assembly  or  are  influential  with  various  deputies
or  senators,  the  change  of  sentiment  is  directly  tied  to
personal   economic  considerations  that  will  be   increas-
ingly  hard to  challenge  as  the  government's  position  in
the  countryside improves.
One  expressed  the  sentiment  of  that  growing  group
this  way:  "Six months  ago, the  land-to-the-tillers plan
offered  me  a  chance,  to  be  perfectly  frank,  to  get  some
American  money  for  land  that  I  had  not  even  seen  in
years   and  that   might  have  remained  contested   or  in
Viet  Cong  control  for  many  more  years.  Now  the gov-
ernment  is  moving  into  new  areas  in  the  countryside,
and  some  of  that  land  is  beginning to  look  like  it  might
be valuable  again  after all.
—"Thieu    Proposal     On   Land    Reform     Is    Losing
Favor",  Woodruff    from   Saigon;  Baltimore  Sun  Nov. 30.
lack  of  land  reform,  on  which  the  corrupt  Filipino oligarchy is
dragging  its  heels.  No  doubt  the  smart  money  in  Manila fig-
ure  that  if  a  civil  war  does  break  out, we'll  fight  it  for  them,
as  in  Vietnam.
THE   NATIONAL   COMMITTEE   OF    FRENCH   WRITERS   in   a
letter  signed  among   others  by  Jean-Paul  Sartre  and   Vercors
has  protested   (Le  Monde,  Nov. 19)   the  expulsion  of  Alex-
ander  Solzhenitsyn  from  the  Soviet  Writers'   Union,  declaring
it  incredible  that  "the fatherland  of  triumphant  socialism"  has
done  to  so  distinguished a writer what  even  the  Czar  Nicholas
had  not  dared  do  to  Chekhov  after  he  exposed   the  treatment
of  convicts in  his  book  Sakhalin  Island  (1891),  as Solzhenitsyn
did  the  Soviet  penal  system  in  The   P/rst   Circle  and  One  Day
in  The  Life   of  Ivan  Denisovich.  We  hope  American writers
will  make  a  similar protest  to  the  Soviet Embassy.
"MAXIMUM   PUBLICITY  FOR  MINIMUM   CUTS  by   duplicate
announcements    is    Senator    Proxmire's    characterization   of
Laird's  highly publicized economy  drive at  the  Pentagon.   The
same  cuts  are  cited  over  and  over  again  as  if  they  were new.
Some  of  them,  Proxmire  pointed  out,  only  mean  bigger  spend-
ing  in  the  future.  He  cited  three  major  examples.  The  $200
million  the  Navy  claims  as  savings  in  mothballing  old  ships
will  be  more   than   offset   by  $2.6 billion   in   new   ship con-
struction  in  fiscal  '70. The  Air  Force  advertises  a  $320.9  mil-
lion  cut  in  purchases  of  the  FB-111  bomber  but  is going  ahead
on  a  new  bomber,  now  called  the  B-l—the   prototypes   alone
will  cost  $2  billion  and  the  projected  fleet  of  200  from  $8  to
$12  billion. The  Pentagon  even  lists  as an  economy  a  "saving"
Silent  Majority?  Or  an  Outpouring from  Republican Regulars?
Q.  The  President  is  stating  what  he  believes  to  be  a  fact,
namely,  that his  policy does  have the  support of  the majority
of  the  people  and  those  who  oppose  it  are  in  the  minority.
I  am  asking  you,  does  he  have  facts  to  back  that  up?
A.  Are  you  familiar  with the  recent  Gallup poll?
Q.  Is  that the  basis  on which  he  is  making that judgment?
A.  I would not  say  that  is  the  basis  on which  he is making
the  judgment. I  would  say  that  is  an  indication  of  the  sup-
port  that the  President has.
Q.  In  his  appeal  to  the  silent  majority, would  he  like  to
see   an  organization  of   demonstrations   in   support  of   his
policy  just  as  there  are  demonstrations  against   it?
A.  Let  me  put  it  this  way.  I  think  the  fact  that  we  have
had  the  response   that  we  have  had  in  terms  of   telegrams
and  phone  calls  indicates  that  the  President's   address  last
night  has  been  very  well  received  by  the  country.   I  think
that  the  President  made  this  clear.
Q.  That   200,000-name  telegram   the   President   got   this
morning   was   done  beforehand.   So   the   President's   speech
did  not  have  any  effect  on  that.  This  was  signed  by  people
who  agreed  with him before.
A. Yes.
Q.  I  am  wondering  if  you  got   any  feeling  of  how  many
people  who  were  phoning or  telegraphing actually had  their
mind  changed  by  the  President  last  night  as  against  how
many  people  are  doing  what  the  Republican  National  com-
mittee  asked  them  to  do  in  sending  in  their  support.
A.  As  you  know,  the  President   in  his  address  last  night
did  not  solicit  telegrams  or  phone  calls.
Q.  He  did  solicit  support  however.
A.  That  is  correct.
—Ron  Zicgler's  White  House  A.M. press  briefing  Nov. 4.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   Dec.  1, 1969
of   $896  million  on  Johnson's  Sentinel  ABM  but  ultimately
will  spend   $8  to  $10  billion  for  Nixon's   Safeguard  ABM.
Proxmire  calls this  a  "Cut  Now,  Pay  Later"  policy.
A  Triply  Silent   American
NIXON'S   FOREMOST   Nor-So-SiLENT   AMERICAN  seems   to
be  Wm.  J.  Casey.  Last  spring  Casey  turned  up  as chairman of
a   "grass  roots"  organization  for   the   ABM,   and  announced
that  a  poll  showed  84%   of  the  American  people—no    less—
favored  Nixon's  ABM.  The  "grass  roots"  of  his  effort   turned
out  to  be  in  Room  495  of  the  Executive Office  building annex
of  the  White  House   (see  Washington  Star,  June  7).   In  July
Casey  was  named  by Nixon  as  an  adviser  to  the  Arms  Control
and  Disarmament  Agency.  On   October   15  there  appeared   a
full  page  ad  in  the  Washington  Post  saying the  time had  come
for   "silent  Americans"   to   speak   up   in  support   of   Nixon's
Vietnam  policy.  Sure  enough,  there  was  Casey  at  the  bottom
of   the   ad   as  chairman   of   these  silent  Americans.  Then   on
November   17  there  was  a  full   page  ad   in  the   New    York
Times,  "Hold  Your  Ears Hanoi:  Here  Comes  America's Silent
Majority"  and  there  was  Casey's  name  at  the  bottom  with  a
brand  new  "Tell  It  To  Hanoi   Committee"   along  with  such
other   "silent   Americans"   as   Clare   Boothe   Luce   and   Leo
Cherne.  Casey  seems  to  be  about  as silent  as  a  calliope.
PEOPLE   IN  GLASS  HOUSES  NOTE:  In  between  speeches  on
tricky  editorial  tactics  perhaps  Agnew  might  find  time  to  look
at  the  USIA's  new  $200,000  quickie  film  on  Nixon's   "silent
majority".  The  film  featured  Dr.  Gallup and  his  poll  showing
a  majority  for  Nixon's  Vietnam  policies  but  omitted  Gallup's
warning  that  "future  backing  of  the  President  depends   upon
the  pace  of  subsequent withdrawals."
VIETNAMESE   BOAST  THAT  MALARIA  WAS   THEIR   ALLY   in
fighting   off  Chinese  invaders  in  centuries  past.  History  seems
to  be  repeating  itself.  A  correspondent  sent  us  a clipping  from
the  special  Sept.   1969  issue  of  Military   Medicine,   the  journal
of  the  Association of  Military Surgeons  of  the  U.S.   reporting
that  malaria  was  "the  single  most  important  military  medical
problem  encountered  in  Vietnam".   There   were   12,000   cases
in   1968  which  cost  a  quarter  of  a  million  man-days lost  and
over  $1  million.  We'll  be  lucky  if  returning  veterans  do  not
bring  virulent  strains  of  this  disease  home  with  them.
WE   HOPE   THE   FBI   will   not   be   too   alarmed   by   Mrs.
Sort  of  A  Galloping  Gallup
POSTMASTER   GEN.  BLOUNT:  I  arrived  in  South
Vietnam   two  days   after   the  President's   November   3
speech  and  I  had  a  chance  to  assess  the  reaction  there.
Of  course  as  you  would  expect   the  Generals   I   talked
with—and  I  talked  with Gen.  Abrams  and  8 or  1C of  the
other   Generals   and   Ambassador   Bunker—were   con-
sistently   extremely   enthusiastic  about   the   speech,   as
well  as  an  expression   of  relief.  But  more  importantly
I  think  was  the  reaction  of our  men. I  talked  with  more
than  1,000  of  them  at  these  various  bases. The  reaction
from  them  was  one  of  solid  support  for  the  President.
—Press  Conference   at  the  White  House,  Nov.  18
The   Postmaster   General   said   he   had   "spent   two
weeks  in  the  Far  East,  Including South  Vietnam,  Korea
and  Japan.  It  turns  out  that  he  had  considerably  less
than  four  full  days  in  Vietnam. When  we  checked with
his   office,  we  learned  that  he  left  Guam  on  Nov.  6,  ar-
rived  in  Saigon  about  noon  that  day  and  left   Saigon
Nov.    9  early  enough  to  reach   Tokyo  that   evening,  a
flight   of  8  or  9  hours.  If  he  talked  with  "more   than
1,000"   soldiers   in  that  time,   it   must   have   been   the
fastest   poll-taking   in   history.    We   wonder   how   he
found  time  to  talk  with  the  Generals  at  all.
Mitchell's  appearance  on  CBS  TV  Nov.   21.  Taken  literally,
the  Attorney  General's  wife  would   make  it  appear   that  this
Administration  prefers  Communists  to  liberals  and  hard-line
Communists  to  "liberal  Communists."  Mrs.  Mitchell  said  she
didn't   think   the   average   American   realized   how   desperate
things  become  when  "the  very  liberal  Communists  move  into
Washington."   That's   exactly   how   the   Kremlin   feels  about
"very  liberal"  Communists  turning  up   in  Moscow.   She  said
her  husband  looked  out  the  window  during  demonstrations at
the  Justice Department   and  thought  "it  looked  like  a  Russian
revolution   going   on."   It   was  hard   to  figure  whether   this
private  remark  by  the  Attorney  General  was  said  in  approval
or  disapproval  since  his  wife  also  said  "my  husband  has  said
many  times,  some  of  the  liberals  in  this  country,  he'd  like  to
take  them  and  change  them  for  Russian  Communists."   The
Daily   Worker   (now  Daily   World)   has  been  trying  hard   for
years  to  do  just  that.
"!T   SEEMS  STRANGE,"   a  Harvard   Med   student  writes  us,
"that   President   Nixon   will   listen   to   me   only   if   I  remain
silent."
How  To  Cook  Up  An  Optimistic  Report  on  Vietnam  For  The  White  House
Q.  How  long  was   the  committee  in  Vietnam?   •
A.  We  were  in  Vietnam itself  for  about  a  week.  .  .  . Our
trip  was  part  of  a  round-the-world  tour. We  had  some brief-
ings  here.  We  had  some  briefings  in  Honolulu  .  .  .  and  we
had  some  contact  with  the  delegation  in  Paris  before  re-
turning  here.  . . .
Q.  Mr.  Guillion,  could  I  ask  you  if  your  committee  in  its
inquiries,  as  you  put  it,  in  Vietnam  found  anything  there
that  you  disagreed  with  in  the  conduct  of  the  war  or  the
pursuit  for  peace,  or  did  you  pretty  well  feel  that  things
were  going  well?
A.  They  were  going,  from  our  point  of  view, surprisingly
well
Q.  Did  you  make  any  attempt  or  were  you  able  to  talk
to  anybody in  the  Hanoi  delegation  or  the  Liberation Front
in Paris?
A.  We  made  no  effort   to  do  this.  .  .  .  Had  we  thought
that  would have  been  a  proper part of  our inquiry,  we would
have  done  that.  It  is  also  true  in  Saigon.  ...      If  we  had
wanted  to  go  to  see  prisoners  in  jail  or  opposition  leaders
in  clandestine circumstances,  it  would  not  have  been  clan-
destine  so  far  as  we were concerned. We did not  do that.  We
did  talk  to  opposition  party  leaders  in  Saigon.  .  .  .
Q.  What  opposition  leaders  in  Vietnam did  you  talk  to?
A.  Different  political  parties.  I  would have  to  look  at  the
list  to  give  you  their  names  .  .  .
Q.  Did  you  talk  to  General  Minh?
A.  No,  we  didn't  talk  to  General  Minh.  .  .  .
Q.  Is  the  committee in  full  agreement  with  every  aspect
of  the  President's  policy?
A.  We  went  out  there  without  any  consultation   with  the
White  House  itself. We  had some  briefings with the  military
department.  I  would say  where  we  diverged  are  matters  of
detail,  of  emphasis,  rather.  .  .  .
—White  House  Press  Conference   Nov.   6  by  Dr.  Edmund
Gullion  for   the  Citizens  Committee  for   Peace  with   Free-
dom   in   Vietnam,  of   which  former   Senator   Douglas   and
George   Meany   are   co-chairmen.    This   pro-Johnson     group
made   the  headlines   with  an  optimistic  report   and   advised
against  "a  too  rapid  rate  of   replacement."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   Dec.  1, 1969
Pro-Nixon  Demonstrators  Were  Sparse  and  Screwball  in  Tone
(Continued  from  Page   One)
conflict  and  said  how  long  the  war  lasts would  "depend  in  lots
of   respects   on   how   good   treatment   it  gets   from   our   news
media."  So  the  main  obstacle  to  victory  is  the  First  Amend-
ment,  and  Jeffersonianism  will  soon  be  un-American again.
Plain  Political  Incompetence
In   Saigon   the   regime   is  cracking  down   on   the   press   as
dissatisfaction  rises. Here  the  Administration is trying to  make
independent  reporting  seem  unpatriotic.  In  the  events  of  the
tumultuous  last  two  weeks,  the  Administration has  been  dem-
onstrating  its  incompetence on  many  levels;  to  give  it  freedom
from  criticism  would  be  an  invitation  to  mismanagement.  The
Haynsworth  affair  was one  example.  We  cheer  the  outcome  but
note  that  it  was  a  self-inflicted   defeat.  The  Attorney  General
was  slipshod  in  his preliminary  inquiry; the  White  House  was
crude   in   its  pressure   tactics.  The   low  point   was   the   crass
attempt   at   political   blackmail—the  threat   to   impeach   Mr.
Justice  Douglas   if  the  nomination  were  rejected.  The   revolt
in   the   Northern    Republican   leadership   showed    the   bank-
ruptcy  of  the  Southern  strategy  and  its  corollary,  the  attempt
to  compete  with  Wallace.in  Know  Nothingism.   Such  hands
at  the  wheel  of  state  are  a  safety  hazard.
The  handling of  the  Mobilization missed  disaster by  a hair's
breadth.  Until  the  intervention of  Mayor  Washington  the  Ad-
ministration  was  on  the  verge  of  denying  a  parade  permit  and
doing  a  Daley.  At  the  Pentagon,  on  the  eve  of  the Mobiliza-
tion,   a   Mass   in   the   south   concourse,  where   it   blocked   no
traffic,   was  broken  up  by  the  police  (all  black  for   the   occa-
sion)   and   an  Episcopal  Bishop  and   the  peaceful celebrants
arrested  just  as  it  drew  to  its  close.  It  was  an  ugly  scene  a
modicum   of   good   sense   would   have   avoided.   Before   the
Mobilization,  the  Administration ostentatiously moved   troops
into  the  capital, as  if  for  an  uprising and  filled  the  press  with
alarms.  It  reminded  me  of  the  days  when   Hoover   called  out
the  troops  under  Mac Arthur  and  drove  the  Bonus  Marchers
out  of  town  in  a  glorious  military  victory.  It  sealed   Hoover's
defeat  in  1932.  The  Republicans are  trigger-happy  again.
Despite  the   incendiary   forecasts,  the  Mobilization  proved
'as   pacific   as  the   Moratorium.  The   March   of   Death   was   a
masterpiece  of  dramaturgy. Thanks  to  an  army  of  marshals,
and  logistic  preparations  few  armies  could  match,  Saturday's,
parade  went  off without  incident, the  greatest  outpouring  of  its
The  Depths  To Which  Our Country  Has  Fallen
"Some  of  the  people  weren't  old  enough  to  walk  yet,
so  I  couldn't  see  how  they  could  be  Vietcong."
—Sgt.   Michael   A.   Bernhardt   of   Franklin   Square,
L.I.,   interviewed  at  Fort  Dix   on  the  massacre  of   the
villagers   of   Songy    in  South  Vietnam.   He   refused    to
participate  and  was  "ostracized"  for  his  refusal.     This
terrible  story  was  dug  out  by  Seymour  M.  Hersh,  work-
ing  with  a  group  of  energetic  youngsters  here  in   Wash-
ington  at  the  "Dispatch"   news  syndicate.  Bigger   papers
have   been  stealing  the  story,  often   within  minimal  or
no  credit.  The  village   was  nicknamed   "Pinkville"   be-
cause  of  its  alleged  Vietcong   sympathies.
kind  in  U.S.  history.  It  was quite  a  contrast  to  the  sparse  turn-
out  and  screwball  tone  of  the  pro-Nixon   demonstration   four
days  earlier.  Even  so,  when  the  Mobilization  drew  to  its  close,
the  police  roughed   up  departing   citizens  on  the   Monument
grounds  and  outside  churches  where  buses  were  being   loaded,
as  if  someone  higher  up  regretted   the  absence  of  violence.   In
the  same spirit the  Attorney General  over-reacted  to  the  Justice
Department   demonstration   against   the   Conspiracy  Trial  by
drenching  the  downtown  areas  with  tear  gas  and  locking  up
passersby  and  two  reporters  with  imbecile impartiality.
Synthetic  Tough  Guys
Nothing  is more  dangerous  than  weak  men  who  think  they
are  tough  guys.  The  resignations  of  Lodge  and  Walsh   at  the
Paris  peace  talks,  coming  after  the  threat  to  re-escalate  in  the
Nov.   3   speech,   indicate  that   the   Administration  is  getting
ready  to  be  "tough"  in  Vietnam  as  at  home.  There  is  no  sign
that  it  is heeding  the  repeated  warnings  of  the  Gallup  organi-
zation  that  its  good   showing   in  the  public  opinion  polls   is
predicated  on  the  expectation  that  Nixon   "will  remove U.S.
troops  from  Vietnam  within  a  reasonable  time."  (New     York
Times  Nov.  23).  That  "silent  majority",  if  any, will  evaporate
if   this  expectation   is  disappointed.   This  is  where  Nixon  is
most  vulnerable.  It  is  the  job  of  the  peace  movement   to  fan
out  into  the  country  with  a  campaign  of  education  while  it
can.  This  Administration is  capable  of  suicidal  folly.   It  may
resume  the  bombing  of  the  North.  It  may  try  another  witch
hunt  at  home.  We  believe  that  if  it  tries either  it will  be  swept
away  in  a  landslide  in  1972,  as  Hoover  was  40  years ago. But
there are bitter  battles ahead.  We  had  better  get  ready for  them.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A   Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped   Addressed   Envelope
FOR   STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the   enclosed  $7.50  send   I.   F.   Stone's   book,   The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War   (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate   if
Please   renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.
4420  29th  St.
Zip
gift    announcement
enter)   a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  Q
the   enclosed   $5:
Starp
F.  Stone's  Weekly                      12/1/69
N.W.,   Washington,  D.C.  20008
/  F. Stones  Weekly
Nou>  Published   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St., N.W., Washington, D.C.
An  independent   bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
$10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED