I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969dec29.pdf

============================================================

Heading  For A  Long  Stay  In  Vietnam, P. 2
Fat  Chance   Footnote
"Not   only   must   he   (Nixon)    propose   social   programs     Congress,  he  must  fight  as  hard  for  it  as  he  fought  for  the
adequate  to  our  needs,   but  when  the  legislation   goes  to     ABM and Judge  Haynsworth."
—John   W.  Gardner,  Chairman   of  the   Urban  Coalition,   before   the  National   Press  Club,  Dec.  9.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi-Weeklv                    **
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVII,  NO. 24
DECEMBER  29,  1969
101
          WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
The  Rebirth  Of Freedom-Or  Of  Fascism?
In  the  middle  of  the  next  decade,  in   1976,  we  will  cele-
brate  the  200th  anniversary of  independence.  There  has  never
been   so  much  doubt   whether   on  that  birthday,  the   United
States  will  still  be  free.  The  next  decade  may  see a  resurgence
of  Fascism  in  many  countries,  as  the  pendulum   swings  from
the  permissive  to  the  repressive.  A  healthy  society  requires  a
balance  of   freedom  with  order,   and   of   social  change  with
stability.  Everywhere  in  the  world   this  balance  has  become
more  difficult  to  achieve,  as  population  explodes   and  life  be-
comes  more  complex.  This  breeds  violence  and  frustration,  as
it  does  when  too  many  animals  are  pushed   into  one   cage.
Hence  the  snarling  and  the  quarreling.   In   our  country,  on
top  of  the  universal  problems  of  pollution,  urban  sprawl  and
youthful  alienation,  we  are  beginning  to  harvest  in  a  spread-
ing  black  revolt  the  bitter  fruit  of  a  century  of  slavery  and
another  century  of  humiliation.  We   cannot   cope  with  these
interlocking   problems   unless  in  the   next  few  years  we  can
raise  sharply  the  level   of  political  understanding  and   social
sympathy  and  convince  the  well-to-do  majority  of  the  need  to
forego   private  luxury  in  order  to  wipe  out  public   squalor.
Critical  of  the  Pentagon's  Priority
Over  the  past  few  years  a  series  of  high  level  commissions
of  inquiry  has  tried  to  further  this  task  of  public  education.
The  latest  is  the  commission  on  violence  appointed  1.8 months
ago  after   the  assassinations  of  Robert   Kennedy   and  Martin
Luther   King,   Jr.   Its  final  report   says   again  what   so  many
earlier  reports  have  said—that  the  way  to  eradicate  crime  and
violence  is  to  eradicate  poverty  and  racial  discrimination.  The
Commission  included  men  as  conservative  as  Senator  Hruska,
Congressman   Hale  Boggs   of  Louisiana  and  Cardinal   Cooke
of   New   York,   military   vicar   of   the   U.S.   Armed   Forces.
"As  a  first  step"  they  called   for  a  reversal  of  the  priorities
which  have  given  the" military  establishment  first  call  on  the
national  resources.  Yet  even  as  the  report  was  issued  the  tides
were  moving  in  the  opposite  direction.
Not  a  single  direct  word  of  comment  or  even  thanks  came
from  Mr.  Nixon  when  the  report  was  presented  to  him.  The
chairman,  Dr.  Milton  Eisenhower,  could  announce  only  that
the  President  had   "authorized"   him  to  say  he  was  "gravely
concerned"   and   would   "study   it   with  care."   The    Weekly
Compilation   of   Presidential   Documents   contains   four   sep-
arate  speeches  and  interviews  given  by  Mr.  Nixon  that  week
on  football,  but  not  one  word  about  the  violence  report!  The
Commission   proposed   that  the  government    increase  welfare
expenditures  by  about  "$20 billion,  partly  from  a  "peace  divi-
dend"  of  reduced  military  expenditure   after  Vietnam,  partly
from   increased  tax  revenues   as  the   Gross   National   Product
grows.  But  Mr.  Nixon  had  already  shown  at  a  press  confer-
ence  a  few  days  earlier  how  foreign   such  calculations   are  to
Add  Optimistic   Reports  To  Nixon
Reams  of  computerized statistics  indicate   that   the
ARVN  (Army  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam)  is  indeed
improving—in  numbers,  efficiency   and  weaponry.   But
one  must  trust  the  computer  readouts  to  accept   that
conclusion.   It  was  forbidden,  for  example,  for  Amer-
icans  to  visit  unannounced  any  Popular  Force   militia
outpost   in   the   Mekong  Delta   province   of    Angiang.
South  Vietnamese  commanders  reasoned  that  the  lacka-
daisical  militiamen  might  be  caught  napping,  or  doing
something else  unmilitary   ...
Before  Americans  can  visit  an  ARVN  division,  they
must   obtain  a  letter   of   introduction   to   the  division
commander.  To procure such a letter  often  takes  weeks,
whereas  a  battle  usually  ends  in  a  matter  of   hours.
In  itself  the  letter  guarantees  entree  to  no one .  .  .
The  7th  ARVN  division  was  assigned  to  fill  the  va-
cuum   left   in   the   Mekong   Delta   by   the   departing
American   9th.   Though   publicly   lauded,  its   perform-
ance   has  been  such  that   American  personnel   in   the
area  have  been  instructed  not  to  discuss   the  division
with visiting  reporters.
—David   Hoffman,     back  from   15  months   in  Saigon,
"ARVN   Gains  Hard  to  Verify,"    in  Wash.  Post, Dec. 16.
his  basic  thinking.
A  reporter  asked  the  President's  comment  on  the  statement
that   there  didn't   seem   much  prospect  of   a  peace   dividend
after  Vietnam,  but  that  this  rich  country could  provide  all  the
funds  necessary  "for  the  very big  problems  at home"  any  time
it  was  prepared  to  make  the  necessary  sacrifices  so  "we  might
very  well  do  it  now  and  get  on  with  the  job."  Mr.  Nixon  did
not  dispute  the  statement  that  the  end  of  the  Vietnam  war
would   not   release  substantial   funds   for   domestic  needs—a
significant  key  to  his  own  planning.  Nor   did  he  deny  that
we  had  ample  wealth  to  meet   domestic   problems.   He  took
a  very  different  tack,  one  that  seemed  to  foreclose  hope.  He
said  Federal,  State  and  local  taxes  already  take  25  to  37%  of
the  nation's  total  income   (30%   is  the  usual  estimate),   and
that   to  take  more  would   mean  that  the  nation   would   lose
"its  character  of  a  free  enterprise  economy."  This  was  saying
that  the  maintenance  of  the  "free   enterprise   system "   takes
precedence    even   over    social   problems    that   may   tear    the
country  apart.  He  implied  that  if  necessary  poverty  must  go
go  on  so that  profit  can  thrive.  This  is vintage  Republicanism.
It  is  also  the  somber  diagnosis  of  Marxist-Leninist  fatalism.
No   radical   has   said   anything   more   subversive   than    Mr.
Nixon's  few  unfeeling  words.
All   this  runs  directly  contrary  to  the  best   advice  of   the
violence    commission    and    its    predecessors.    The    so-called
(Continued   On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Dec. 29, 1969
Low  Cost   Maybe,  Long  Haul   Certainly
THE  NUMBER  OF   OUR  TROOPS  IN   SOUTH  VIETNAM  may
be  coming  down   but   our  war   aims  are  going  up.    This  is
implied   in  the  passage  of  a  report   by  Sir  Robert  Thompson
which  President   Nixon  chose  to  read  in  announcing   another
50,000  reduction  in  troops  by  April  15.   He  said  Sir  Robert
reported   that  a  "winning  position"  had  been  achieved   in  the
sense  "of  maintaining  an  independent   non-Communist   South
Vietnam."   For  us  this  means  the  Thieu-Ky   regime,  and  that
would  mean  both  a political  and  a  military  victory.  Mr.  Nixon
did  not  disclose  how  soon  Sir  Robert  thought  this  could   be
achieved.    He   said  only  that  the  British  guerilla   war   expert
was  "cautiously  optimistic."    In  his  latest  book  No  Exit   From
Vietnam,  Sir  Robert   said  it  would  take  "three  to  five  years"
before  Hanoi  decided  to  accept  this  "or  just  fade  away"  but
"even  then  the  U.S.  could  not  relax.   A  continuing  but  much
reduced   military  commitment   would   still  be  required,   as  in
Korea.  .  .  •."   This  is  what   Sir  Robert   calls  a  "long   haul,
low cost"  strategy.
When  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Packard   returned   from
Vietnam,   he  was  asked  at  a  press  conference   Dec.   5  whether
we  intended   to  retain  bases  there.    He  said  it  was  too  early
to  decide  but  added,   "I  think  you  probably  ought  to  look  at
South  Korea.    We  still  maintain  some  bases  there."   He   also
thought  it  too  early  to  say whether  our  residual  forces  would
include  "ready  reaction  combat  troops."  When  Secretary  Laird
was  before  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee   Nov.   19
(the   censored    transcript   Briefing   on   Vietnam   was   released
Dec.   10)   Senator  Gore  elicited  an  admission   from  him  that
some   combat   troops   would   remain   in   South    Vietnam    to
protect   the   air,  artillery   and   logistical   forces   which   would
stay   on   to   support   Saigon.    Since   these   forces   add   up   to
more  than   200,000  troops,  posted   at  various   points   around
the   country,   a   sizable   number'  of   combat   troops  might   be
needed  to  protect   them.   Apparently  while  Mr.  Nixon  hopes
to  withdraw  all  forces  from   combat,   he  does  not  intend   to
withdraw  all our  combat  forces.
Over   and   over   again   in   the   Foreign   Relations   hearing,
Senators  pressed  Laird  and  Secretary  Rogers  to  tell  them  what
we  would  do  if  the  South  Vietnamese  army  began  to  crumble.
The   Senators   never  got  an  answer.   Mr.   Nixon   has   several
times  warned  that  he  would  re-escalate  if  the  enemy   stepped
Nixon's  New   Adviser  Agrees  With HQ
Although  the  captured  American  military  men  had
perpetrated  monstrous  crimes  such  as  the  use  of  B-52's,
napalm  bombs  and  toxic   chemicals,   etc.,   to   burn  and
destroy   villages   and   cities   and   massacre   honest   ci-
vilians,  they  have  enjoyed  a  lenient  and  humane  treat-
ment   from  the   Vietnamese   people.    In   contrast,    the
Vietnamese  Army  men  and  civilians  captured  by   U.S.
troops  and  the  Saigon  puppet administration  have  been
tortured  and  massacred  most  savagely.
—From   Ho   Chi   Mink's    reply    to   Sen.    Fulbright's
letter  on  behalf    of  POW's,  New   York   Times,  Dec.  16.
"It  should  have  been  the  task  of  U.S.   representatives
to   encourage   the   South   Vietnamese   government   to
function  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  law  .  .  .  torture
and  the  shooting  of  prisoners  .  .  .  are  crimes  .  .  .  the
U.S.  should  not  have  tolerated  the  commission   of  these
crimes  by  South  Vietnamese  forces  whatever  the  provo-
cation  in  the  form  of  Vietcong   atrocities."
—Robert  Thompson:   No  Exit  From  Vietnam,  p.  164.
up  its activity.  Would  we  resume  bombing  the  North?   It  did
not  prevent  the  North  before  from  sharply  increasing  its  effort
in  the  South.   The   Washington   Post  in  a  scathing   editorial
Dec.   17 wondered  whether  the  know-how  Sir  Robert  acquired
in  Malaya  is  relevant  to  the  Vietnam  war.   Malaya  was  small
potatoes   compared   to   Vietnam.    Even   there   it   took   40,000
British   troops   12   years   to   defeat   8,000   guerillas,    mostly
Chinese  and  therefore  easily  distinguishable  from  the  Malays
who   gave   them   little  support.    In   Vietnam   a  half   million
U.S.   troops  plus   1,000,000  ARVN  failed   to  win   a  victory
over   240,000   enemy   forces   actively  armed   by  the   Russians
and  Chinese.    Vietnam  has  been   struggling   for   25  years   for
independence.    Even   to   many   anti-Communist    Vietnamese,
we  look  no  better  than  the  French.*   What  reason  is  there  to
believe  the  rebels  will  "fade  away"  now?
*And   our   ARVN   Generals  must   look   like   the   same   old
turncoats.  The  Senate  committee  staff   asked   the   Pentagon
how  many  of  the  54  ARVN  Generals  fought  for  the  French
and  how  many  for  the  Viet  Minh.   The  reply  was   that   50
fought  for  the  French  and  "two  served  with  the  French  and
Viet  Minh."   When  we  inquired  at  the  Pentagon   what  this
meant,  we  were  told  these   defected  from  the  Viet  Minh  to
the  French.   So  52  of  the  54  fought  against  their  own  people.
(See  p. 144 of  Briefing   on  Vietnam).
Fulbright  On The False Alternatives  Posed By  Nixon  To End The War In Vietnam
The  best   possible  prospect  for  Vietnamization—that  is,
for   Thieu   and   Ky   and   for   the   Nixon  Administration's
prestige—is   a  continuing  war  of   stalemate  and  attrition,
with   a   reduced  number  of   Americans  reverting   to   their
pre-1965   "advisory"   role   in   a   semi-permanent   war   of
counter-insurgency.   For  the  Vietnamese  people  this  would
mean  continuing  terror  and  death  for  the  indefinite  future.
The  weakness   of   "Vietnamization"  is   the   weakness   of
the   South    Vietnamese    government   itself.    Its   claim   to
legitimacy  is   based  on  rigged  elections.   In  his  speech  of
Nov.  3,  President  Nixon  said  that  "we  really  have  only  two
choices    open    to   us:    either   'precipitate'   withdrawal   or
Vietnamization."   There  is  a  third  and  better  option:  the
negotiation  of  arrangements  for  a  new  interim  government
in  South  Vietnam,  for  elections   conducted  by  the  interim
coalition  regime  with  or  without  international supervision,
and  for  complete  American withdrawal.
There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  in  return  the  Viet-
cong  and  the  North  Vietnamese  would  be  willing  to  make
significant   concessions.   They   have   already   indicated   that
they  would  not  expect  total  American  withdrawal  prior  to
substantive  negotiation  but  only  a  commitment to  a  definite
schedule  for  withdrawal.  They  have  already  indicated  that
a   transitional   government   need   not   necessarily    include
members  of  the  National  Liberation  Front.
In  addition  the  North  Vietnamese  government  is  on  rec-
ord   as   being  willing  to   accept   a   neutralist,   independent
South  Vietnam  which  they   would  not  seek  forcibly  to  re-
unite  with  North   Vietnam.   It  should  also  be  possible,   in
such  a  negotiation,   to  make  arrangements   for   a   general
amnesty   on  both  sides   and  for   prevention   of   the   "blood
bath"  which  the  Administration  confidently  predicts  should
the  Vietcong  ever  gain  power  in  South  Vietnam.
Lacking  either  a  reliable  army  or  the  support  of   their
own  people,  the  Saigon   generals   have  only  one  solid   base
of   power:  their  veto   over  American  war   policy.   If   they
had  anything like  the  same  influence  in  Vietnam  that  they
have  in  Washington,  Thieu  and  Ky  would  have  beaten  the
Vietcong  long  ago.
—Senator  Fulbright  speaking  in  St.  Louis  Dec. 10.  (Abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

1. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Dec. 29, 1969
Rogers  on  the  Middle  East
THE   NEW   ISRAELI   CABINET   MARKS   a   shift   to   the   na-
ionalist  right.  Gahal, the party of  a Greater  Israel,  has increased
its  seats  in  the  new  Cabinet  from  two  to  six,  and   Rafi,   the
party  of   Moshe  Dayan,   has  a   second   seat,  to   be  filled  by
Shimon  Peres,  a  hard-liner  who  will  be  in  charge  of  economic
and  political   affairs  in  the  occupied  territories.   Another   price
exacted  by the  right  was  a  decision  to  establish  Jewish  colonies
in   the   occupied   lands.    This   spells   trouble.    It   will   make
withdrawal  more   difficult   and   exacerbate  relations  with   the
Arabs.  We  hope the  American  Jewish  community will  provide
a  saner  counter-balance   to  this  shift.   We  deplore  the   attack
now  underway  against   the   speech   made  by  Secretary   Rogers
on  the  Middle  East.   We  see the  speech  as  an  effort  to  retain
some   U.S.   influence  with   the   Arabs  and   to   use  this   for   a
compromise   solution.    The   alternative  is  to  drive  the   Arabs
completely  into  the  increasingly  anti-Semitic Soviet  camp,  and
move  toward  Great   Power  confrontation  in  the  Middle  East.
This  would   be  dangerous   for  all  its  peoples,  and  for  world
peace.  Both   Israel   and   the  Arab  States  are  locked  into  un-
realistic  positions  by  internal  politics.   The  only  hope  is  if  a
settlement  can  be  partially  imposed  and  partially midwifed by
the   great   powers   in   accordance   with   the   Security   Council
resolution  of  November   1967.   This  is what  the  Rogers  speech
envisages.   The  only  effective  way  to  counter  guerilla   opera-
tions  is  to  provide  a  stable  political  framework  for  Palestinian
Arabs  in  the  West  Bank  and  Gaza,  and  a  large  scale  program
of  restitution  and  resettlement   for  the  Arab   refugees.    Their
plight   is  a  moral  millstone  around  the  neck  of  world  Jewry.
Neither   peace  nor  reconciliation  is  possible  until  these  home-
less  have  homes  again.
A  FEW WEEKS  AGO ATTORNEY  GENERAL  Mitchell  sought
to  revive  the  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  as  a  witch-
hunt  weapon   by  filing  charges   against  a  dozen  minor   Com-
munist  party  officials  around  the  country  for  failing to  register
with  the  Board.    He  should  have  waited  for  the  outcome  of
a  test  case  before  the  Court  of  Appeals  here  in  Washington.
On   Dec.    12  the   government   lost   that   case,   Archuleta   and
Holley  v.  SACB.   Chief  Judge  Bazelon  ruled  for  a unanimous
3-judge  panel  that  "mere  membership  in  the  Communist  Party
is  protected   by  the  First  Amendment"   and  registration  with
the  SACB  is  unconstitutional  as  inhibiting  freedom  of   asso-
When  A  Hawk  Nips  A  General
Members  of  this  body  are  well  aware  that  I  do  not
have  any  particular  antimilitary  bias   [but]   I  strongly
believe  that  we  should  end  waste   in  the  Defense   De-
partment.   Well,  right  here  with  the  TOW  missile  is  a
classic   example.   In  the  first  place  the  TOW  and  the
Shillelagh  are  almost   identical  weapons  but  the  Shil-
lelagh  is  already  in  mass  production, whereas  the TOW
is   still   in   research   and  development.    Moreover,   the
TOW  is  more  than  twice  as  expensive  as  the Shillelagh.
And  if  we  go  the  full  distance  on  the  TOW  it  would
cost  $1 billion.  Gen. Westmoreland, whose  desire  to  get
the  TOW is  very largely  the  reason  that  the  committee
has  put  this  money  in  for  the  full  amount,  urged  me
to  support  TOW.   He  gave  me  a  classified  fact  sheet.
He  said:  "Sam,  you  can  see  from  this  fact  sheet  just
how  different  these  two  weapons  are."   But  the  thing
that  amazed  me  when  I  looked  the  classified  sheet  over
was  that  they  are  almost  absolutely  identical  with  one
exception,   and  that   is   that  the   Shillelagh   weighs   10
pounds  more  than  the  TOW.  But  half  of  the  extra  10
pounds  is  because  of  a  heavier and more lethal warhead.
—Rep.  Stratton  (D.-N.Y.)   in  support   of  an  unsuc-
cessful   amendment   to  cut  a  $100  million  allocation   for
the  TOW  missile  from   the  Defense   Appropriation  Bill.
(Abridged.)     Dec.  8  Congressional   Record,   P.   411889.
ciation.  .  .  . How  different  is the  situation  in  the  Soviet  Union
where  the  brave  General  Grigorenko  has  just  been  put  in  an
insane  asylum   (along  with  other   dissidents)    for   daring   to
exercise  that   freedom   of   speech*the   Soviet   Constitution   os-
tensibly  guarantees!
How   MUCH  HOPE  of  any  real  progress   in  the  SALT  talks
when  the  U.S.  and  the  Soviet  Union  did  their  best  to  prevent
the  United  Nations   from  passing   a  resolution   asking  for  a
freeze  on  new  strategic  weapons  systems?   One  can  only  con-
clude  that  both  are  set  on  developing  MIRV   and  neither  is
ready  to  halt  testing.
WHO    WOULD   HAVE   DREAMED   that   25   years  after    the
defeat   of   Hitler,   Germany   would   move   to   expel   a  Fascist
Greece   from   the  Council  of  Europe  while  the   U.S.  lobbied
unsuccessfully  to  block  its expulsion?  .  .  .  We  found  the  new
French-Greek   movie   "Z"    intensely   moving,   an  anti-Fascist
film which  seemed  a  preview  of  what  could  happen  here,  too.
To  Repeal  All  "Blank  Checks"  For  War  and  End  Military  Rule  in  South  Vietnam
The  first  section  of  my  resolution  would  repeal  past  Con-
gressional    resolutions    based   on   an   essentially   negative
view  of  the  American  world  mission.   In  each  instance  we
imply  that  military  containment of  Communism  is  the  chief
function  of  our  foreign  policy.   The  resolutions  applied  this
principle  in  1955  to  Quemoy,  Matsu  and  Formosa;  in  1957
to   Lebanon  and  other   Middle   Eastern   countries;  in  1962
to  Cuba  and  Latin America; and  in  1964 to  North Vietnam.
All   these    resolutions   were   enacted   without  termination
dates   and   are   based   on  assumptions   of   dubious  validity
today.   The  Tonkin  Gulf  resolution  is  the  most  questionable
of  all.
The  second  section  of  my  proposed  resolution  is  perhaps
the  single  most  important  of  all  the  cold  war  enactments
promulgated  by  President  Truman  on  Dec.  16,  1950,  with-
out  Congressional  endorsement  or  ratification,  declaring  a
state  of  national  emergency  at   the  time  of   the  outbreak
of  the  Korean  conflict.   That  state  of  emergency—with its
myriad  derivative  provisions—remains  in  effect.   The  Con-
stitution  did  not  envisage  a  state   of  emergency  to  be  the
normal  state  of  affairs.
Section  3  is   based  on  the   proposition  that  no   plan   for
American  military  withdrawal will  end  the  war  unless  the
present  South  Vietnam  government  adopts  a   plan  for   its
own  political  withdrawal.   The  Thieu-Ky  regime  was  chosen
by  a  little  over  one-third of  the  vote  in  elections  restricted
to   areas   controlled   by   the    military   and   to   candidates
accepted  by them.
Under  my  resolution  Congress   would  urge  leaders  from
all  religious,  political  and  ethnic  groups  in  the  country  to
initiate  serious  discussions  designed  eventually  to  produce
a  new  broadly  based  government  that  can  survive  our  de-
parture  and  prevent  resumption  of   the   conflict.    Needless
to   say,   in   order   for   meaningful   political   discussions   to
occur,   the   Thieu-Ky   regime  would  have  to   release   from
prison   those   leading   political   figures   incarcerated   essen-
tially  for  advocating  or  attempting  such  discussions.
—Mathias   (R.  Md.)   on  SJ   Res  166  Dec.  8.   (Abr.)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Dec.  29,1969
The  Challenge  Of  The  Seventies  To  Our  Concerned  Youth
(Continued  From Page  One)
Southern  strategy  which  has  led  wags  here  to  call  the  Nixon
White  House  Uncle  Strom's  Cabin  is  more  than  Southern.  It
aims   to  mobilize  the   smug   against  the  concerned,   the   un-
thinking   wealthy   against   the   despairing   poor,    bewildered
middle  age  against  idealistic youth, and  bigoted  whites against
desperate  blacks.  This   strategy  may  indeed  put   Wallace   out
of  the  running  in  1972,  as  it  is  intended  to  do,  and  let  Nixon
ride  triumphantly  back  into  power   on  an  undivided   Know
Nothing  vote.  But  the  cost  in  social  turmoil  will  be high,  and
the  price  may  make  the  U.S.  in  1976  a  police  state  like  South
Africa.  Here  as there  the  price  of  racial  repression  must  prove
to  be  everybody's  freedom.
Law  and  Order?  Or  Black  Repression?
Seen  through  the  eyes  of  the  blacks,  the  events  of  the  year
end  are  sinister.  The   effort   to  get  rid  of   the   1965   Voting
Act   and   to   slow   down   school   desegregation    looks   like  a
second  post-Reconstruction   era,  an  attempt   to  solidify   white
supremacy  again  in  the  South.  Law-and-order  seems  to  trans-
late  itself  in  this  Administration  only  into  black  repression.
In  New  York  City  a  U.S.  Attorney  who  has  been  vigorously
prosecuting  white  collar  crime  is under  White  House   pressure
to  get  out  just  as  his  investigations  touch  financial  interests
involved  in  Saigon  black marketing and  the  Mafia's  Swiss bank
operations.  Crime  in  the  banks arouse  no  such  passion  as crime
in  the  streets.  Worst  of  all  is  the  trigger-happy  lawlessness  of
the  police  themselves  as  demonstrated   in  the  Black   Panther
killings  in  Chicago  and  the  shoot-out  in  Los  Angeles.  These
have  stirred  terrible  fears.
The  Black  Panther  raids  have  sent  seismic tremors  through
a  black  community  which  has  hitherto  had   little  sympathy
with  this  revolutionary fringe.  It  is  amazing how  many blacks
are  obsessed   with  what  happened   to  the  Jews  in  Germany.
They  fear—however  horrible  this  may  sound  to  decent  whites
—a  similar  fate.  They  see  the  Black  Panther   affair   in  a  long
perspective.  For  two  centuries,  under  slavery  and  after,  the
militant  has  been  the  special  target  of  harassment  and  killing.
In  the  ghettoes  today too  many policemen  treat  suspected  mili-
tants  with  a  hatred  they  rarely  show  drug  peddlers  or  pimps.
The  Chicago killings look  like the  climax in  a series of  "search
and  destroy"   operations  designed  to  wipe  out  the  Panthers,
and   as   a   first   step—however   wildly  exaggerated   that  may
sound—toward  genocide  should  blacks  insist  on  their  rights.
As  Indiscreet  and  Intemperate  As  His   Mrs.
Hot  Springs,  Ark.—One   relatively  moderate  Republi-
can  state  governor  came  away  today  from  a  talk  with
John   N.   Mitchell,   Attorney   General,    with   no  doubts
that   Mr.  Mitchell   is   an  unreconstructed   conservative.
The  governor,  who expects  to  run for  the  United  States
Senate  next  year,  was  asked  by  Mitchell   if   he   would
be  with  Mr.  Nixon  all  the  way.    "About  99  percent  of
the  time,"  the  governor  responded.  "That's  not  enough.
We  need   100  percent  support,"  the   Attorney   General
replied.   The  talk  shifted  to  a  possible  Nixon  nominee
for   the   Supreme    Court   as   a   replacement   for   Judge
Haynsworth.  The  governor  suggested  Judge  John   Wis-
dom  of  the  Fifth  Circuit.   Judge  Wisdom  is  regarded  as
a  moderate.    "He's   a  damn  left  winger,"  the  governor
reported  Mr.  Mitchell  snorted  in  reply.   "He'd    be   as
bad as Earl  Warren."        —The  Baltimore  Sun,   Dec.   H.
If  this  fear  of  a  bloody  confrontation  and  a  "final  solution"
Nazi-style  be  paranoia,  it  is  up  to  the  white  community  to
dispel  it.  For  these  fears  are  a  menace  to  our  common  future.
Normal   politics  will  no  longer  do.  Normal   politics  is  the
Southern   strategy.  Normal   politics   is  the   new   tax  bill,   in
which  both  parties  compete  to  give  tax  relief  when  we  require
a  sharp  increase in  taxing  and  spending.  We  need  a  campaign
of   public  education,  reaching   into  every   town   and   village,
carrying  to  town  meetings  across  the  country  the  findings  and
the  recommendations of  the  Kerner  commission  and  the Eisen-
hower  violence  commission   and  all  the  other   sober   counsels
of  recent  years.  We  need  to  convert  a  benighted  into  an  en-
lightened    majority.    We    need    a   small • army   of   youthful
Thomas   Jeffersons   to  bring  home  again  the  lessons   of   free-
dom  and  of  social  change  as  the  Framer  of  the  Declaration  so
well  understood   them.  We   need  a  mobilization  to  make  us
realize  that'whatever  our  differences  we  are  trapped  together,
breathing  the  same  air,  drinking  the  same  water,  walking  the
same  streets.  The  rich  could  buy  no  finer  luxury  than  to  pay
the  cost  of  keeping  them  clean  and  safe.  To  wipe  out  poverty
and  racism  would  be  to  make  America  really  secure.  But  to
get  the  kind  of  planning  and  spending  required   we  need  a
revolution  in  public  understanding.  No  other  revolution  will
work,  for  it  is  the  comfortable  majority  itself  which  must  be
converted.  To  bring  that  about  is  the  truest  challenge  of  the
Seventies,  a  task  worthy  of  our  finest  youth.
As  we  close our  17th  year  of  successful publishing we  thank  our  friends  and  readers  for  their  support  and  wish  them
most  warmly  a  Happy  New  Year.
FOR
For  the  enclosed
Hidden  History  oi
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate   if
Please  renew   (or
Name
Street
City
4420  29th  St.
STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
$7,50  send   I.  F.   Stone's  book,  The
P  The   Korean  War   (Monthly  Review
.  ...      Zip                State
gift   announcement  wished  Q
enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5 :
Zip  ....            State
F.  Stone's  Weekly                  12/20/69
N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.   20008
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  0.  C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,   N.W.,   Washington,   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED