I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969feb10.pdf

============================================================

What  Nixon  Has  Yet  To  Accept  in   "Sufficiency"   P.  2
A  Pity  The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff   Won't   Apply  The  Same  Humane  Heresy  in  Vietnam
"I   saw  no  point  in  senselessly   sending  people  to  their   deaths."
—Commander  Lloyd  M.  Bucher   before   the  Naval  Court  of   Inquiry  in  the  Pueblo     affair.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
7V7m<mi   T)*llt1*rl+siJ     J?..'  TJ/*>/»/J//ll                                 ^^
Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVII,  NO.  3
FEBRUARY  10,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Why  The  Casualties  Rise  As The  Peace  Talks  Go  On
President  Nixon's  dismissal of  a  cease-fire  in  Vietnam  calls
for  close  examination.  It  was  sophistry  to  say  that  a cease-fire
"may  be  meaningless"  in  a  guerilla  war  because  of  the   diffi-
culty  in  controlling   it.   Whatever  element  of  truth  this  may
contain  as  a  general  proposition,  the  history  of  past  truces  in
the  9-year old  Vietnam  war  shows that  the  other  side has  had
little   difficulty   in  enforcing  a   cease-fire   on   its  own  troops.
Cease-fires  have  been  broken  by  the  other  side  on  any  mean-
ingful  scale  only  when  they  wanted  to  break  it,  as  in  the  Tet
offensive  last  year,  or  in  defensive  response  to  the  aggressive
patrolling   which  has  been  our  military's own  way  of  getting
around   cease-fire  orders  in  holiday  truces.   Until  the  bombing
pause  the  U. S.  official  line  was  to  call  for  a  cease-fire  as  the
price  of  a  bombing  halt.   The  line  has  changed   because  we
hope  to  exploit  the  present  situation  by  "clean  up"  operations
against   the  guerillas   in   the  South.   That  is  why   casualties
still  rise as the peace  talks go  on.
Political  Censorship  at  the  Pentagon
A  neat  bit  of  censorship  is helping  to  hide  the  truth.   The
Pentagon  gives  out  figures  on  attacks  initiated  from  our  side
but  the  figures  on  enemy-initiated attacks  are  "classified",  an
antiseptic  word  for  censored.    One  of  these  censored  figures
came  to  light  last  December   14  when  the  New   York   Times
in  an  editorial,   "Endangering  the  Peace  Talks",  said   "Since
the  .bombing  halt,  the  enemy  has  initiated  only  one  battalion-
sized   assault.    By  comparison   last   month   American  troops
mounted   63  battalion  operations  and   South  Vietnam  staged
664  such  campaigns."    It   said   the  purpose  was  "to   extend
South  Vietnamese Government control  over  disputed  areas and
territory  long  controlled   by  the  Vietcong"   and  warned  that
such  an  effort  "to  upset  the  balance  in  Vietnam  in  advance  of
a  settlement  in  Paris  is  bound  to  produce  a  reaction  sooner
or  later"  and  risk  a  flareup  "that  could  wreck  the  chance  for
a negotiated  peace."
In  the  wake  of  the  Nixon  press  conference,  we  went  over
to  the  Pentagon  to  check  the  Times figures and  bring  them  up
to  date.   We  found  the   tempo  of  offensive   operations  from
our  side  had  gone  up  about  25%  in  December  over  Novem-
ber.   The  figures  on  battalion-sized  operations  from  our  side
in  December   were  824   South  Vietnamese,  84  U.S.  and   48
combined,   or  a  total  of   956  as  against  the   727  figure  the
Times  gave  for  November.   But when  we  asked  for  the figures
on  enemy-initiated actions  of  battalion  size,  we  were  told  that
all   the  figures  on  enemy-initiated  actions   were   in   classified
tables.   We  went  to  two  differer:   sources  and  finally  put  in
Quite  A  Change  In   Emphasis
"I  am  becoming inordinately  impatient  with  the  con-
tinued  deaths  of  American  boys  in  Vietnam.   I  would
like  to  get  going at  the  Paris  peace, conference.  I  would
like  to  get  started  on  these   plans  to  lower  the   level
of  combat.   This  isn't   difficult   to  do.   I  would  like  to
start  getting  our  troops  out  of  there.   I  would  like  to
see a  cease-fire."
—Defense   Secretary  Clifford:   Face The Nation  Dec. 15
Q.  Mr.   President,    do   you   consider    it   possible    to
have  a  cease-fire  in  Vietnam  so  long  as  the  Viet  Cong
still  occupy  Vietnamese  territory?
A.  I  think  that  it  is  not  helpful  in  discussing  Viet-
nam   to  use  such  terms  as  "cease-fire",  because  cease
fire  is  a  term  of  art   that  really  has  no  relevance,   in
my  opinion, to a  guerilla  war.
—Nixon's  first  press  conference  January  28
"President   Nixon   has  -endeared   himself    to   South
Vietnam's   leaders   by   noting   in   his   first   press  con-
ference   the  irrelevance  of  a  paper   'cease-fire'   to   the
realities  of the Vietnam  conflict  . . . Just  as a bombing
halt   was  anathema  to   Saigon   officials   three   months
ago,  so  a  cease-fire  frightens  them  today."
—Special  from  Saigon  to the Washington  Star Jan. 29
a   formal   question   on  why   such   figures   were  classified,  but
we're  still  waiting  for   an   answer.   The   New   York    Times
assertion  was  not  challenged.   One  officer  explained   that  any
paper  with  a  man  in  Saigon  who  kept   a  sharp  eye  on   the
daily  communiques   could  get  figures  on   enemy-initiated  at-
tacks.    Obviously  the  totals  on  enemy  attacks   do  not  keep
any  information  from  the  enemy  he  does  not  already  know.
This  is  political not  military  censorship,  designed  not  to  con-
fuse  the  enemy but  to  hide  what  is going  on  from  the  Amer-
ican  public.   We  hope  some  members  of  Congress  will  insist
that  these figures be  released.
The  course  in  Vietnam  becomes  clearer  if  one  compares  it
with  U  Thant's  original  3-point  plan  for  peace.   At  his  press
conference  January  28  the  Secretary  General   noted  that  two
of  the  points had  been  put  into  effect  —  the  bombing  of  the
North   had  ended  and  talks  among   all  the  parties  involved
had  begun.  U  Thant's  third  point  was a  gradual  de-escalation
of   the   fighting.   Instead  of   de-escalating   in  response   to   the
considerable  de-escalation  on   the   other   side,   we  have  been
stepping   up   both   ground   and   aerial   action   in   the   South,
as  we  have  the  bombings  over  Laos.
(Continued  On  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February   10, 1909
Escalation  In  The  South  Has  Cost  2,000  American  Lives  Since  Nov.  1
( Continned  Prom  Page  One)
Tacitly  or  explicitly,  it  is  now   becoming  clearer,   Johnson
exacted   a  sharp  price  when   he   ended   the   bombing   of   the
North.     He   imposed    severe   restrictions   on   enemy   activity
while  making  it  possible  for  us  to  increase ours.   The   Nixon
administration  is  carrying  on  the  strategy  of  Johnson's.    This
strategy  has  two  elements.   The  first  is  to  threaten  resumption
of  the  bombing  ir.  the  North  if  the  other  side  should  resume
substantial  forays  or  shellings  from  the  DMZ  or  should  attack
the  larger  cities.   The   second   is  to  take  advantage   of  these
military  limitations  on   the   other   side  to  move   considerable
forces  from  the  northern  part  of  South  Vietnam  where  they
had  been  on  guard  against  a  possible  invasion  from  the   DMZ.
These  forces  have  been  moved  south,  for  "pacification"  opera-
tions  in  the  Mekong  Delta.   This  has  been  a  guerilla   strong-
hold  since the  earliest  days  of  the  uprising  against  the  French.
The  aim  is  to  reconquer   the  Delta  for  the  Saigon  regime.
The  Semantics  of  Accelerated  War
The  bombing  of  the  North  ended  Nov.   1.   The   escalation
from  our  side  began  at  the  same  time.    In  the  three  months
since  more  than  2,000  Americans  have  lost  their  lives.   White
House  orders  explain  the  rising  casualty  lists.   Clark   Clifford
lifted   the  curtain  on  them   last  November   24  when   he  said
"General  Abrams  has  specific  instructions to  maintain  constant
and   intensive   pressure   on   the   enemy."    The   fight-and-talk
strategy   was   ours.    Our   Madison    Avenue-minded    military
invented  a  new  soap  ad  phrase  to  sell  this  accelerated  warfare.
They   renamed   it   "accelerated   pacification."   Clifford   added
loyally   that   this   was   "the   right   psychology   and   the   right
strategy  to  follow  now,"   but  he  expressed  the  hope  that  when
"we   begin   to   make   progress   in   Paris"   and   agreement    "in
certain  areas"  was  reached  "then  instruction  could  be  given  by
Hanoi  to  their  battlefield  commanders,   and  instruction  could
be  given   here  by  President   Johnson   to  General  Abrams   to
withdraw  from  contacts  with  enemy  forces."  The  enemy  began
withdrawing  from   contact  and  trying  to  evade  battle  months
ago.   But  there  has  been  no  de-escalation  on  our  side.   Three
When  and  How  "Sufficiency"   Made  Its  Debut
What   has   escaped  general  notice   is   that  the   term
"sufficiency"   was   first   used   during   the   Eisenhower
administration   to   fight   off   a   Democratic  scare  cam-
paign  about  a  "bomber  gap"  and  later  a  "missile  gap"
just   like   the   "security   gap"   campaign  against   the
Democrats   last   year   by   Nixon   and   Laird.    The   man
who   first   used   the  term   "sufficiency"   was   Donald   A.
Quarles,   Ike's   Air   Force   Secretary.   He   was   reviled
for   it  by  the   Air   Force   lobby.   As   late   as   April  24,
1959,   Joe   Alsop  in   a   bitter   column   called  him  "Mr.
Missile  Gap." What  Quarles  said  more  than   a  decade
ago  applies  with   equal  force  today.   "There   comes  a
time  in  the  course  of  increasing  our  airpower," Quarles
had  the  nerve  to  tell  the  Air  Force  Association  Aug.  4,
1956,   "when  we   must   make  a   determination  of   suf-
ficiency  .  .  .  There  is  no  occasion  in  this  audience  to
labor  the  point  that  the  buildup  of  atomic  power  in  the
hands  of  the  two  opposed  alliances  of  nations  makes
total   war  an  unthinkable  catastrophe  for   both   sides.
Neither  side  can  hope  by  a  mere  margin  of  superiority
in   airplanes   or   other   means   of   delivery   of   atomic
weapons  to  escape  catastrophe  .  .  .  even  if  there  is  a
wide   disparity   between   the    offensive   or   defensive
strengths   of   the  opposing   forces."   In  another  speech
on  Sept.  26  the  same  year,  he  said  we  could  "produce
more   weapons   than   the   entire   Communist  coalition"
but   that  this   "might  well   undermine  the   very   social
and  industrial  foundations  upon  which  our  strength   is
based."   In   an   earlier   speech   that  year,  on   Feb.   25,
Quarles  even  saw   in  the   "balance  of   terror"  between
the  nuclear  powers  "the  ray  of  hope  that  we  may  have
a   period  of   enforced   peace   in  which  differences  may
be   adjusted   and   tensions   relaxed."   There   is   as   yet
little  sign  that   Nixon  or   Laird  is   prepared  to  adopt
not  only  the  Quarles  term but its  underlying  philosophy.
weeks  later  on  Face  the  Nation,  Clifford   (see  p.  1  box)   de-
clared,  himself    "inordinately    impatient  with   the   continued
deaths  of  American  boys  in  Vietnam"  and  urged  a  cease-fire.
Neither  Johnson   nor  Nixon   seem  to   share   this   impatience.
Nixon  can  cut  the  casualties  any  time  he  orders   de-escalation
and  a  defensive  strategy,  as  proposed  by  Senator  McGovern  in
Not  A  Security  Gap But  The  Danger  Of  A  New  Spurt  in  the  Nuclear  Arms  Race
Q.  During   the   Presidential   campaign   President   Nixon
charged  that  the  Democrats  had  allowed  a  security  gap  to
open.   Do  his  comments  at  the  press  conference  about  suf-
ficiency imply  that there is no security gap?
A.  No.   I  believe  the  President's   earlier  comments  were
borne  out  very  factually  in  the  posture  statement  that  was
delivered by  Clark Clifford  to  Congress.
—Defense   Secretary  Laird  at  press  conference   Jan.  SO.
"It  is   reasonable   to  conclude   that  even   if   the   Soviets
attempt  to   match  us  in  numbers  of  strategic   missiles   we
shall   continue  to  have,  as  far  into  the  future  as  we  can
now  discern,  a  very  substantial  qualitative  lead  and  a  dis-
tinct   superiority   in   the   numbers   of   deliverable   weapons
and   the  overall  combat   effectiveness  of   our  strategic   of-
fensive   forces.    But  even   so  we   should  have   no  illusions
that  superiority alone  will  guarantee  our  safety."
—p.   46  Clifford's   final   "posture"   statement,  after   noting
(p.   42)   that   the   U. S.  has  4200  deliverable   nuclear   war-
heads  against  1200  for  the  USSR,   or  10  times  as  many   as
the  400  which  McNamara    testified   last  year  were     sufficient
to  impose  "unacceptable"   damage   on  the  Soviet  Union,   i.e.
to  cripple  it  as  a viable   society.
Clifford  declared  it  "distinctly  hopeful"  that  the   Soviets
want   negotiations   on   missiles.     Clifford   said   this    recog-
nized  "that  increased  security  cannot  be  found  simply  in
the  procurement  of  additional  strategic  weapons  —  which
may   mean  instead   merely   another   upward  spiral  of   the
arms  race,  the  economic  costs  which  such  a  spiral  implies
and   a   net   reduction  in   safety   for   all   mankind."   (p.   3)
He  warned  (p.  49)   that  "We  stand  on  the  eve  of   a  new
round  in  the  armaments  race  with  the  Soviet  Union,  a  race
which  will  contribute  nothing  to  the  real  security  of  either
side."
In  our  (ultimately  successful)   search  for  a  copy  of  Clif-
ford's  report,  we  discovered  that  it  had  not  been formally
submitted  to  the  House  Armed  Services  Committee  by  the
Pentagon   and   that   the   Committee  was   not   planning   to
incorporate   it   in  this   year's   "posture"  hearings.    A  com-
mittee   aide  told  us   loftily,   "Clifford   has   a   right   to   his
personal  opinion." Neither  the  Pentagon  nor  the  Committee
likes appeals  for arms limitation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  10,  1969
Nixon  Can  Cut  The  Casualties Anytime  By  Ordering  De-Escalation
a   speech   Feb.  3   to   Clergy   and   Laymen   Concerned   About
Vietnam.
The  premise  of  negotiations  is  that  neither  side  can  win  a
military  victory.    If  we  are  negotiating,  why  go  on  killing?
If  we  hope to  achieve  our  aims  in  South  Vietnam  by  a  stepup
in  the  killing,  why  negotiate?   The  cynical  answer  is  that  the
negotiations  serve  as  a  smokescreen.  Neither  the  U.  S. military
nor  the  Saigon  regime  ever  wanted  to  negotiate.   The  Paris
talks  for  them  only  make  it  easier  to  continue  the  war. There
is  a  steady  flow  of  optimistic  stories  from  Saigon  on  how  well
the  war  is  now  going.   One  by  Charles  Mohr   in  the   New
York   Times  Jan.  3  put  its  finger  on  a  crucial,  though non-
military   factor.    "One   important   factor   on   which   present
optimism  is based," Mohr wrote,  "is  the  hope  that  a  decision
to  continue  to  prosecute  the  war  can  be  reconciled  with  the
domestic  American  desire  'to  ease  the  pain'  ".
Realities  Few  Notice
Few  notice   the   realities   reflected   in  the   last   AP   weekly
casualty   report   from   Saigon   (Washington  Post,   Jan.  31).
The  report  covered  the  week  ended  Jan.  18  (196  U.  S.  dead
and   1277  wounded)   and   the   week   ended   Jan.  25   (190
U.S.  dead  and  1224 wounded).   Why   are  casualties  still  so
heavy?    The   AP   explained  that  while  "there  has  been   no
sustained   large-scale  fighting   since   last   Fall   .  .  .  thousands
of  U.  S.  and  government  troops  carry  out  daily  operations  in
search  of  the  elusive  enemy."   It  added  that  "pushes  are  also
being  made   into   areas  long  held   by  the  Vietcong,  and   in
these,   even   when   no   opposition   is   encountered,   there   are
casualties  from  mines  and  booby  traps."   How  long  can  these
offensive   operations  go  on  without  a  counter-offensive   from
the   other  side?    As  we   write,   for   the   first   time   in  three
months,  there  have  been  three  battalion   size   enemy  attacks
in   the  past  few  days.   It   is  time  to   make  the  U. S.  public
aware  of  all  this  before  fighting  flares  up  again  in  full   fury.
It  is  nonsense  to  say  that  you  cannot  have  a  cease-fire   in
The  Price  We  Pay  For  The  Price  We  Impose
"It  would  be  a  mistake  to  believe  that  by  spending
enough  on  arms  the   U. S.  can  force  the  Soviet   Union
to   accept   second   class   status   simply  because   of   its
smaller  economic  and  industrial  capacity.   Long  before
that  point  is  reached  America's  own  growth  will  have
been   stunted   and  its   society   badly   distorted   by   the
military  demands  placed  on  it.
"The   effect   of   the   arms   race   on   Soviet   decision-
making  must  also  be  considered.   A  rapid  growth  rate
and   increased  consumption  and  consumer  influence   in
the  Soviet  Union  are  almost  certainly  in  the   long-term
U.S.   interest.   Conversely,  the  greater   the   Soviet  de-
fense   budget,   the  stronger  will  be  the   hand   and  the
longer   the  tenure  of   those  elements   in  Moscow   most
inimical  to  the  United  States.
' Thus,   increased   allocation  of   Soviet   resources    to
the  arms  race  is  triply  disadvantageous:  in  increasing
the  threat  to  the  United  States;  in  requiring  that  the
country  devote  its  own  resources  to  responding;  and  in
delaying  changes  in  Soviet  society  which  are  the  long-
term  hope  for  a  more  stable,  peaceful  world."
—Geo.   W.  Rathjens:   The  Future   of   the  Strategic
Arms  Race:  Options  for   the  1970s  (Carnegie  Endow-
ment  for  International Peace), a point worth  remember-
ing  when  Nixon  links  political  conditions  to  arms  talks.
Vietnam.   Fighting  ended  in  the  first  Vietnamese  war  when
a  cease-fire  was  negotiated  at  Geneva  in  1954.  Then  it  was
part  of  the  general  settlement.   The  question  is  one  of  policy,
not  feasibility.   The  Viet  Cong  and  Hanoi  oppose a  cease-fire
until   there  has   been   a  political   settlement.    The   U. S.  and
Saigon  don't  want  a  cease-fire  until  there  has  been  a  military
"settlement".   They  cling  to  the  old  hope  that  the  war  will
end   with   the   enemy   "fading   away",   a   favorite   phrase  of
Henry  Cabot  Lodge  whom  Nixon  resuscitated  to  be  his  chief
negotiator   at  Paris.    The   U.  S.  military   seem   to   be  making
their  plans  on  the  assumption  that  there  will  be  no  settlement
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
Inside  The  Arms  Gravy  Train:  The  Poorer  The  Weapons  The  Higher  The  Profits
Thanks   to   the  enterprise   of   Washington   Post   reporter
Bernard  D.  Nossiter  what  he  terms   "the   first   systematic
effort   to  measure  how  well  or  ill  the  Pentagon's   expensive
weapons  perform"  has  been  made  public.   His  story  on  the
report  January  26  led  to  its  release  by  the  Budget  Bureau
four  days  later  and  an  attempt  by  Secretary  Laird  at  press
conference    Jan.   30   to   disparage   it   as   just   a   "graduate
thesis",  a  description  he  repeated  8  times  in  one  form  or
another.
But   Richard   A.   Stubbing,    author    of    "Improving   the
Acquisition   Process   for   High   Risk   Electronics    Systems,"
is  no  ordinary  graduate  student.   He  spent  four  years  as  a
cost   engineer   at   Eastman   Kodak  after   Harvard  Business
School.   Since   1962  he  has  been   a  Budget   Bureau  missile
and  aircraft  examiner.   In  the  academic  year  1967-68,  with
other  outstanding  career  officials,  he  was  selected  to  attend
Princeton's   Woodrow  Wilson  school,   where  he  wrote   this
paper   based   on  his   experience.    A  version   naming   names
was classified.
The  report  covers  13  major  aircraft  and  missile  programs
since  1955  without  identifying  them.  They  cost  a  total  of
$40  billion.   Only  four,  costing   $5  billion,  could  be  relied
upon  to  perform  at   more  than  75%  of  specifications,  and
"less   than   40%  of   the   effort   produced   systems  with   ac-
ceptable  electronic  performance."   Two  of   them   (the   B-70
and   the   Skybolt   missile)   were   scrapped   after   an   outlay
of  $2 billion.
The  rewards  of   inefficiency  were  high.   Aerospace   indus-
try,   "with   a   high   wage   structure  and   a   reputation   for
inefficiency",   earns  "a  12%  greater   return   on  equity  than
the  average   of   all   U.S.   industrial  firms."  To  relate   per-
formance   to   profits,   the   report  studied  two   leading   arms
contractors.   X  (identified  by  Nossiter  as  North  American)
earned  profits  40%  higher  than  the  aerospace   average  with
98%  of   its   business   government  in  the   10  years  1957-67.
Its   score   on  six   military   programs   was   1   successful,    1
cancelled,   and   four   that   broke   down   four   times   as   fre-
quently  as  promised.
Contractor  Y  (identified by  Nossiter  as  General  Dynam-
ics)  also  netted  better  than  the  aerospace  industry  average.
None  of  the  seven  weapons  systems   it  built  measured  up
to  expectations.    Among  them  was  the  notorious  TFX,  now
known  as  the F-lll.   Laird  in  a  phone  call  to  Nossiter  after
the   press   conference  said  publication  of   such   data   might
weaken  U. S.  negotiators  in  arms  talks.   To  paraphrase   a
famous  remark by  an  English  General  about  his  own  troops,
these  weapons  may  not  scare  the  enemy  but  they   certainly
should  scare  us.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's   Weekly,  February   10,1969
A  Provisional  Government  and  Free  Elections  As The  Road  To  Peace
(Continued   From  Page  Three)
in  Paris.   They  plan  a  prolonged   American occupation,  though
on   a   reduced   scale.   "From   those   most   deeply   involved   in
overall  strategy"   in  Saigon  and  Washington,   U. S.  News  &
World  Report  Jan.  27  reported  that  our  military foresee a  slow
reduction  of  U.  S.  forces  in  Vietnam  to  200,000  men  by  the
end  of  1971.   They  set  that  level  as  '.'the  basis for  a  long-haul,
low-cost   effort   in  Vietnam  that  could  continue  indefinitely."
On  such  a  scale  "low  cost"  could  still  mean  $5  or  $6  billion.
The  military  men  U. S.  News  interviewed  regard   Korea  as  a
precedent.   There  we  still  have   50,000   men   15  years  after
the  shooting   stopped.    We  also  have  no  peace  treaty,  a  con-
tinued  trickle  of  casualties  and  the  ever  present   danger   that
the  war  may  break  out  again  at  any  time.   That  is  not  a  com-
forting  precedent.
Cease-Fire  Agitation   in  Saigon
For   the   Vietnamese  people   the   end   of   bombing   in   the
North  has  meant  an  intensified   terror   from   the  skies  in  the
South.   B-52s  are  employed  like  buckshot,  spreading   destruc-
tion  over  wide  areas,  often  on  the  edge  of  the  cities,  wherever
we  think  a  few  guerrillas  may  be  hiding.   Nobody   but   the
victims  have  any  conception  of  what  this  horror  means.   It  is
not   strange   that   in   Saigon,   despite   press   control   and   the
thousands  imprisoned  for  peace  agitation,  the  cry  for  a  cease-
fire  has  been  rising,  though  little  reported   in  the  U. S.  press.
Both  Le  Monde   (Jan  28-29)   and  Le  Figaro  (Jan.  29)  report
that   elements  which  have  hitherto   strongly   supported   Thieu
have  joined  the  militant  Buddhists  in  demanding  a cease-fire.
They  quote  Father  Ca  Van  Lau, head  of  the  Dan-Tien   bloc  in
the   Saigon   Chamber  of   Deputies,   as  calling   for   a  cease-fire
now,  as have two  leaders of  the  Don  Xa  and  the  Grand  Union
Forces,   organs   respectively   of   the   Hoa   Hao   sect   and   one
faction  of  the  Catholics.    Both  parties  demonstrated   last  No-
vember   in  favor  of   Thieu.    Now   both   parties  have   swung
over   to   the   Buddhist  demand   for   an   immediate  cease-fire.
In  this,  as  in  so  much  else,  we  are  very  poorly  informed  as
to  what   ordinary   Vietnamese  think.    To   call   for   peace   is
still  to  risk  jail  in  Saigon.   The   ungagged   voice  of  popular
sentiment   may  be  better  expressed  in  a  manifesto   issued  in
A  View  From  The  Grass  Roots
"This  prosperous  hamlet  of  orchard  growers  is  one
of   1,100  in  the  Vietnamese  countryside earmarked for
'accelerated  pacification'  by  early  February,  a  scheme
begun   in   November   and   described   by   one  American
pacification   worker   as   'the   pre-cease  fire  land  grab.'
He   was   alluding   to   the   official   reasoning   behind   the
new  program: get  control  of  as  much  land  as  possible
before  a  cease-fire to  diminish  the  Viet  Cong's political
influence   locally   and  internationally.
"The  Saigon  government  was  claiming  control  over
68%  of  South  Vietnam's  16,000,000  population  in early
November,  statistics  which  credit  the  Viet   Cong  with
control   of   fully   or   partially   32%   of   the   population,
or   more  than  5,000,000   people.  'This   huge   chunk   of
population   would  qualify   the   Viet   Cong  in  the   eyes
of  the  world,  to  a  big  slice  of  government representa-
tion,' one  U.S.  official  declared. It  was  therefore decided
to   try   and  whittle   down   the   fize   of   the  Communist
part  of  Vietnam  and  'accelerated pacification*  resulted."
—AP  from  My  Long, Vietnam, Baltimore Sun  Jan.  19
Paris  (Le  Monde,  /an.  30)  of  a  Movement  of  the  Free  Forces
of  Vietnam,  representing  both  civilian exiles  and  former Viet-
namese   officers   who   fought   in   the   army  organized   by   the
French.   It  terms  the  present  regime  "nothing  but  a  prolonga-
tion   of   the   Fascist   regime   of   Ngo   Dinh   Diem",   which
"governs   by  terror".   It  calls  for   its  replacement  by  a   pro-
visional  government   which   can  negotiate   in  Paris  with   the
Viet  Cong  and  Hanoi.
This  parallels  the  position  taken  by  Hanoi  and  the   NLF
in  the  Paris  peace  talks.   The  NLF  spokesman  called  for  the
formation  of  a  broadly  representative provisional government
in   Saigon   which  would  organize  "free   general  elections  in
South  Vietnam"  and  be  prepared   to  deal  with  the  NLF   in
the  Paris  talks  as  an  independent  and  equal  party.  (See  texts
in  Le  -Monde,  Jan.  28).  "Although  they  speak  of  negotiations
for   peace,"   the   NLF   delegate  to  the  Paris  talks   said,    "the
United  States  continues to  intensify  the  war,"  and  "still  does
not  wish  to  renounce their  aggressive  aims  in  South  Vietnam."
We  are  paying  heavily  in  American  lives  in  an  effort   to  im-
pose   the   Saigon   regime  by  force   on   the  South  Vietnamese.
That  is  why  the  casualties  rise  as  the  peace  talks  go  on.
FOR   STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book, In
A Time of  Torment (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
Indicate  if   gift   announcement  wished   D
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for   the  enclose!  $5:
Name
Street
City   ...
Zip                  State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                  2/10/69
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington, D. C. 20015
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed Envelope
~                                             ~~   /  E  Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  0.  C.  20015
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W..  Washington,   D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  S17 to  Europe;  S20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED