I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969jul28.pdf

============================================================

The  Spock   Victory,  P. 2; Fulbright  Exposes  That  84%-for-ABM   Ad,  P.  3
The Best  Official  Answer to  the  Pentagon's  Favorite Nightmare
"Neither  the  United  States  nor  the  Soviet   Union  has  a  'first  strike'  capability .  .  .  [and]   most  authoritative analysts
are  agreed  that  neither  power  can  hope  to  achieve  such  a  capability."
—Eighth   Annual   Report   of   the   U.S.  Arms   Control   and   Disarmament   Agency   as  sent   to   Congress   by   President
Nixon  on  March  11  and  quoted  by  Senator   Cranston   (D.  Cal)  in  a  speech  against  the  ABM  in  the  Senate  July   18.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
J\T™,,   n*,M*'<-l,»J   I?.* TJ/^»£/.i                          *^
Now  Published Bi-  Weekly
VOL  XVII,  NO.  15
JULY   28,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Hoax  That  Cost  A Trillion  Dollars  In  25 Years
The  basic  issue  behind  the  ABM  debate,  but  rarely   men-
tioned  in  it,  was  touched   upon  in  'the  minority  report  from
inside  the  Senate  Armed  Services  Committee.    Of   the   seven
members   who   voted   against   the   ABM,    three—Symington,
Young   of   Ohio   and   Inouye—signed   a   dissenting   opinion
which  said—
The  American people  have  lived  with  fears  of  a  Soviet
attack  for  some  quarter  of   a  century,  ever  since  World
War  II,  and  have  expended  a  thousand  billion  dollars  on
defense  in  recognition  of  this  possible  danger.   These  gi-
gantic  expenditures  have  been  detrimental  to  many  other
plans,  programs  and policies  which now  also  appear  vitally
important  to  the  security  and  well-being  of  this  Nation.
The American people now know  that  many billions  of  these
dollars  spent  on  defense  have  been  wasted.
The  truth  is  that  we have  spent  a  trillion  dollars  since  World
War  II  on  a  gigantic  hoax.   The  U.S.  emerged   from  World
War  II,  as from World  War  I,  virtually unscathed,  enormously
enriched  and—with the  atom  bomb—immeasurably  more  pow-
erful   than  any  nation   on  earth  had   ever  been.   The  notion
that   it   was  in   danger  of   attack   from   a   devastated   Soviet
Union  with  25  million  war  dead,  a  generation   behind   it  in
industrial  development,  was  a  wicked  fantasy.   But  this  myth
has  been  the  mainstay  of  the  military  and  the  war   machine.
Projecting   One's  Own  Worst   Impulses
Until  this  bogeyman   is  disposed  of,  there  will   always  be
an  ABM.   There  will  always  be  some  new  device  offered   us
in  panic  as  necessary  to  our   security.   Until   the  opposition
moves  from  the  technical  details  of  weaponry—whether   ABM
or  MIRV—to  an  attack  on  this  underlying  obsession   with  a
Soviet  attack,  we're  never  going  to  bring  the   arms  budget
and  the  arms  race  under  control.   At  a  hearing  of  his  Senate
Foreign    Relations   Committee   on   MIRV   July   16,   Senator
Fulbright  put  his  finger  on  the  essential  point  when  he  said
the  Pentagon  experts   "seem  to  assume,  I  have   never   been
quite   clear   why,   that   they   [the   Russians]   have   only   one
object  in  life  and  that  is  to  destroy  the  United  States,   and
everything  else  is  subordinate  to  that  objective.   I  do  not  ac-
cept   that."    A   psychologist   would   say  that   such   a   view
projects  on  the  Rival  or  Enemy  the  worst  impulses  of  one's
own heart.
In  a  cold  war  speech   which  sounded   as  if  it  came   right
out  of  deep  freeze  in  the  Fifties,  Jackson  told  the  Senate  in
a  pro-ABM   speech  July  9  it  was  essential   to   know   one's
enemy.   It  is  even  more  essential  to  know  oneself.    Jackson's
Question  For  A  Lunar  Morning  After
The  day  men  first  stepped  on  the  moon  may  prove
a  bad  day  for  mankind.  We  have  spent  $30  billions  on
space; the  Russians, a  comparably  burdensome  amount.
These  are  only  down-payments.   Now  the  competition
to  be  first  with a  base  on  the  moon,  and then  on  Mars,
begins   and  with  it   new  fears   and  tensions.    In  the
Senate  debate  on the  ABM last  week  Symington quoted
that  premonitory  remark  by  former  Air  Force  Chief  of
Staff   White,  "Tomorrow  those  who  control  space  will
control   the   world."   An  arms  race  in  space  will  put
Hell  in  the  heavens.    While  the  earth  decays,  we  will
fill  the  skies  with  flying  weaponry.   That   giant  leap
will  soon  land  us  in  the  Buck  Rogers  era;  its  puerile
mentality  and  enormous  cost  will  be  a  provocation  to
the  desperate  poor  everywhere,  while its  gilded  welfare
rolls  maintain  a  new  crop of  millionaires  from  Houston
to  San  Diego.   That  tidal  wave  of  TV  banality  on  the
moon  landing  turned  an  historic  moment  into  a  cosmic
commercial,  a  planetary  brainwash  to  keep  their  aero-
space  gravy  train  moving.  It  is  still  not too  late  to ask
ourselves,   "What  if   we  let   the  Russians  be  first  on
Mars  and  we  become  the  first  on  earth  to  wipe  out
poverty   instead?"
speech  might  have  been  written   by  John   Foster   Dulles.    It
had  all  his  Manichean  self-righteousness.   All  the  forces  of
Light  were  on  our  side;  all  the  forces  of  Darkness,   on  the
other.  In  a world  of  demonology,  there  can  be  no  diplomacy.
If  both  sides  are  human,   equally  fallible  and   fearful,   then
compromise  and  accommodation   are  possible.   But  if  it  is  the
Devil   in  new  guise  who  sits  at  the  other  side  of  the  table,
one  cannot  negotiate.  One  can  only  frighten  ot  "deter"  him,
and  hold  in  reserve  weapons  fearsome  enough  to  destroy him,
if  he  slyly  ventures  an  attack.   In  such  a  world  the  problems
are   purely   technical   and   military.   Their   solution   requires
ever  better  and  more  numerous   weapons.    In   such  a  world
there  can  be  no  limit  to  military budgets  and  military  power.
That's  why  the  military  men  on  both  sides  prefer  it.
"The   point,"  Cranston  of  California  said  in  an anti-ABM
speech  July  18,  "was   perhaps  made  most  succinctly  a  couple
of  months   ago  by  a  Soviet  Embassy  official   in   Washington.
'If   the   Americans  want   to  throw   away  $7  billion  on   this
toy,'  he  said  of  the  ABM,  'it  only  means  that  our militarists
will  want  more  missiles,  and  that  your  militarists  will   -want
more   missiles,   and  there   it  goes."   By  this   route   "there   it
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/_. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  July  28, 1969
Spock  Verdict  A  Victory  for  Peace  and  Draft  Resistance
THE   REVERSAL  IN  THE  SPOCK   CASE   is  a  victory  of  major
importance   to  the  peace  movement.    The   Court   of   Appeals
decision   puts   the   Justice   Department    on   notice   that   any
further  attempt  to  prosecute  anti-war  and  anti-draft  resistance
as  conspiracy  may expect  astringent  and  skeptical  treatment  on
appeal.   But  the  decision  itself   is  disappointing  in  three  re-
spects.  The  Appeals   Court  did  not  pass  on  prejudicial  error
in  the  conduct  of  the  trial.  "There  is going  to  be one  verdict,"
the  trial  Judge,  Ford,  said  at  one  point   to  defense   counsel
Telford   Taylor,   "and   it's  going  to  be  guilty."  *
This  was  only  the  most  overt   indication  of  Judge   Ford's
bias.  The  description  set  forth   in  the  brief  of   Dr.   Spock's
courageous   counsel,   Leonard   Boudin,   recalls   the  conduct  of
Federalist  judges  in  the  days  of  the  Alien  and  Sedition  laws.
Another   important   area   on   which   the   Appeals   Court  was
silent  is  Judge  Ford's  refusal  to  permit  the  defense  to  chal-
lenge  the  constitutionality of  the  draft  law  and  the  illegality
of   the  Vietnamese  war.   The   former   is  clearly   a  justiciable
question.   The  latter  may  be  more  difficult  for  judicial  action
but  there   is  no   reason   why  persons   facing   prosecution   for
opposing  a  particular  war   should   not   be  allowed   to   place
on  the  record  of  their  trial  the  reasons  they  believe  that  war
to  be  a  violation  of  the  Constitution  and  of  international law,
particularly  as  amplified  by  the  Nuremburg   trials.
Secondly,  in  acquitting  Dr.  Spock  and  Michael   Ferber   but
remanding   Rev.   Wm.   Sloane  Coffin   and  Mitchell  Goodman
for   a  new  trial,  the   Court   drew   distinctions   which   are  so
fuzzy  as  to  endanger   First  Amendment   rights  where   expres-
sions  of  opinion  can  be  linked   by  one  device  or  another   to
dragnet  conspiracy  indictments.
This  brings  us  to  our  third  objection.    We  believe  that  in
the   area   of   First   Amendment   rights,   conspiracy   should   be
De-Escalation  Or  Flim-Flam?
"Seattle,  July  10—Rain,  martial  music,  pretty  girls,
ticker  tape  ,  .  .  greeted   the   first   GIs   pulled  out  of
Vietnam  in  President  Nixon's  effort  .to  de-escalate  the
war.     The   814   members  of   the   3rd   Battalion,  60th
Infantry,   9th   Infantry   Division   landed   yesterday   at
McChord  Air  Force  Base  .  .  .  Fewer  than  200  of   the
men  actually fought  in  the  3rd Battalion in  the  Mekong
Delta  area  of  Vietnam.   When  the  transfer  order  came,
those  with  time  left  to  serve  in  Vietnam  were  moved
to  other  units  and  the   battalion  was  filled  with  men
ready  to  return  home.  The  men  will  not  be  specifically
replaced   in   Vietnam.    But   the   day   they   landed   at
McChord,  more  than  1,000  fresh  troops  left  the   base
for  a  year's  tour  in  the  war  zone.   This  month  more
than  10,000  others  will  follow  them."
—Steven  V.  Roberts  in  the  New York  Times July  11.
*  Senator   Young  of   Ohio,  once   chief   criminal   prosecutor
of  Cuyahoga  County  in  that  State,  appeared  as  a  character
witness  for  Dr. Spock.  He told  the  Senate July  14 he  thought
the  assignment   of  the  86-year  old  Judge  Ford  to  the   case
"stacked  the  cards"  against  the  defendants.   He  said  Judge
Ford's  conduct  reminded  him  of  Judge  Jeffreys,  the  famous
"hanging  judge"  under  James  II.
outlawed,  particularly  where  the   "conspiracy"   was  a  public
manifesto,  in  this  case  against  the  war  and  the  draft.   "Every
conspiracy,"   Mr.   Justice  Harlan   protested  in  the   Grunewald
case   (353   US   391),    "is   by  its   very   nature   secret;   a   case
can   hardly   be   supposed   where   men   concert   together    for
crime  and  advertise  their  purposes  to  the  world."   Such   pre-
cisely  was  the  Spock   case.   By  calling  it  a  "conspiracy"   and
prosecuting  it  as  such  the  government  gave  it  sinister  connota-
tions   associated   with   secret   plotting,   and   set   a  net   under
which  hundreds  of  signers  could  have  been  prosecuted   even
though   they  did  not   specifically   intend  any  violation  of   the
law.   If  the  Appeals  court  is right  about  Coffin  and  Goodman,
they  could  be  prosecuted  for  the  substantive  crime  of  counsel-
ling,  aiding  and  abetting resistance to  the  draft.  The  standards
of   proof   would   then   be  stricter,  and   criminality  could   not
be  imputed   by  conspiratorial  association  to  others.
HISTORICALLY   THE  CONSPIRACY   mode  of   prosecution   has
been   the   tool   of   repression   in   Anglo-American   law.    Its
most   notorious  use   was   in   earlier   attempts   to   treat   trade
unions  as  criminal  conspiracies.   Generally  when   prosecutors
do  not  have  proof  sufficient  to  convict  of  a  substantive  offense,
they  indict  for  conspiracy  to  commit  that  offense.   This  allows
Senator  Gore  Indicates  Secret  U.S.  Policy  Would  Keep  Us  In  Vietnam  For  A  Long  Time
Sen.   GORE:  You  said   that   Gen.  Wheeler   would  study,
or  the  second   purpose  of  the  visit  would  be  to  reassess,
the  question   of   deployment  ...       A   piecemeal,   gradual
withdrawal,  which  seems  to  be  the  policy  now  inaugurated,
leaving  in  Vietnam  sufficient   U.S.   troops   to  maintain  the
Thieu-Ky  regime  in  power is  not,  in  my  opinion,  a  road  to
peace,  but   rather  to   prolong   the   war  and,  at   very  best
after  a  period  of  years,  having  a  Korean-type   settlement,
which  has  not  been  very  satisfactory   .  .  .
Sen.   FULBRIGHT: .  .  .  Among  other  people  that  Gen.
Wheeler  is   to   confer  with  is   Admiral  McCain.   Admiral
McCain  [Comander  in Chief, Pacific]  earlier  this  year  wrote
an  article   for  Readers  Digest  ...      in  which  he  said  we
have  the  enemy  on the  run .  .  .  The  facts  did not  support
his  theory.   Now,  on  July  9  ...      in  Tokyo,   according  to
the   Chicago  Tribune  Press   Service,   it   says   and  I   read:
"The  U.S.  top  commander  in  the  Pacific  told  Japan  today
that  a  military  victory  in  Vietnam  is  possible   .  .  ."  Are
you  certain  that  the  Administration  and  the  military  have
given  up  the  idea  of  a  military  victory?   Admiral  McCain
feels  it  is  feasible,  and  if  Gen.  Wheeler  is  going  there  and
he  persuades  him  it  is,  then  I  presume  you  would  not  bring
any  more  troops  home  and  we' might  even  return  some  of
them  ...
Sec'y  LAIRD:  Our objective  in  Vietnam is  not  a military
victory  but .  .  .  the  right  of  self-determination  .  .  .
Sen.  GORE:  Has  there  been  any  change  in  the  objectives
of  our  country  in  Vietnam  by  the  present   Administration?
Sec'y    LAIRD:   Yes,   1  believe   that   there   are   certain
changes.
Sen.  GORE: In  objectives?
Sec'y  LAIRD: Basic  changes  .  .  .  but I  want  to  make  it
clear   that   as   far   as   our  overall   objective   is   concerned
that  has  not  been  escalated,  and  I  felt  that  this   statement
from  Admiral  McCain  might  give  one  that  impression.
Sen.  GORE:  I  did  not  ask  you  if  the  objective  had  been
escalated.    I  am  going  to  send  you  a  top  secret  document
with  a  marked  sentence   which  I  will  ask  you  to  look   at
and  then  I  will  ask  you  again  if  there  has  been  a  change
in  objectives  ...     I  have  an  arrow  pointed  to  the  sentence
there  .  .  .  Have  there  been  changes  in  the  objectives  of  the
U.S.  Government in  South  Vietnam?  .
Sec'y  LAIRD: No.
—Senate  Foreign   Relations   Committee   July   15.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  28, 1969
How  the  Pentagon  Censored   Nixon's  Disapproval  on  CBW  Warfare
loose  procedures  and  circular  modes  of  reasoning  which make
prosecution   easier.   So  conspiracy  has  been  called  the  darling
of  the  modern   prosecutor's   nursery.
Conspiracy  law  is  a  metaphysical  bog  so  treacherous  a  jury
of   12  St.  Thomas  Aquinases  would  be  hard  put  not  to   lose
its   way.   The   only   safe   course   would   be   to   outlaw   it   al-
together  where  First  Amendment  rights  are  involved.  Other-
wise  as  Judge  Coffin   urged   in  his  dissent  from  the  order   for
a  new  trial,   "such   diverse   groups  as  Clergy   Concerned,  a
consumers'   boycott  of  California  grapes,  a  parents'  group  for
so-called   'freedom   of  choice'  plans  within  a  Southern  school
district  might  find  themselves  facing a  conspiracy  indictment."
Judge   Coffin   added,   "Even   if   the   Court's   safeguards   were
rigorously    applied,   the   ranks   of   individuals  enlisted   in   a
controversial  public  cause  would   visibly  shrink  if  they   knew
that  the  jury  could  find  them  to  be  members  of  a  conspiracy."
The   "chilling   effect"  on   the   exercise   of   free   speech   or
association,  Judge  Coffin  pointed  out,  is  "obvious."    It  is  also
obvious   that   this  chilling   effect   is  exactly  what   the  Justice
Department   hoped   for  in  the  case  of   the  anti-war  and  anti-
draft   movement.    Much   of   that  chill  has   been   removed  by
the  victory  in  the  Spock  case,  but  the  danger  is  still  there  as
long  as  expressions   of  political  opinion-can  be  woven  into  a
conspiracy   indictment.
Our   warmest  salute  to  defendants   and   counsel,   especially
to  Dr.  Spock   who  has  done  his  duty  so  nobly  by  the  babies
he  helped   to  raise,  and  former   Supreme   Court  Justice  Gold-
berg   for   lending   his  prestige  to   the   defense    as  counsel   for
Dr.     Coffin.
THE   PENTAGON   Now     CENSORS   NIXON   as   delegates    to
the  disarmament   talks   in  Geneva   will  find  if   they   compare
Nixon's  message   to  them  July  3  as  recorded   in  the   official
Weekly   Compilation  of  Presidential  Documents  here  with  the
message   as   transmitted    to   Geneva.    The   latter   omitted   a
sentence  which  said  "The   specter  of  chemical  and   biological
warfare  arouses  horror  and  revulsion  around  the  world."   The
Pentagon  objected  and  succeeded  in  striking that  sentence  out.
We  urge  some  delegate  to  investigate  and  record  this  in  the
official   minutes.
The  AMA  Had  Better  Check
Lest  This  Put  Medicare  on  Mars
"A  young  man,  a  South   Carolinian,  came  into  my
office  not  long  ago  and  said  'I  want  to  thank  you,  Mr.
Congressman,  for  sending  me  to  the   U.S.   Air   Force
Academy  in  Colorado  Springs.'   He  said,  'I  am   proud
of  these  silver  wings—I can  fly  anything  in  the world.'
He  added,  'I  have  already  been  selected   for  the  team
to  land  on  Mars  in  1981.  .  .  .  and  so  I  am  studying
medicine  ...    I  am studying  medicine  in  order  to  know
the  effects  of  space  on  the  human  body  so  that  I  can
medically   treat   men  on  Mars.'"
—Rep.  Wm.  Jennings  Bryan  Dorn  of  South, Carolina.:
address  on  the  space  program  to  that  State's  General
Assembly,  p.  E5937   Congressional    Record   July   15.
WE   SAY FAREWELL   to  our   old   friend   Ed   Lahey.    To   a
profession   which  breeds  banality,  he  brought   the  soul  of  a
medieval  Saint, with  a  Saint's love  of  the  outcast.   His  writing
had  the  vigor  of  the  slums  in  which  he  grew  up.   He  treated
the  ephemeral  great  with  irreverent  humor  and  he  warned  in
a  Lovejoy   address  two  years  ago  against  the   "spiritual  cor-
ruption"   bred   among   newspapermen   in  Washington   by  the
desire  to  be  "in".    Someone  should  publish  a  collection of  his
columns  and  dispatches,  for  they  belong  to  the  rare  literature
of   American  journalism.
Hidden   History   Back  In   Print
I.   f.   Stone's   Hidden  History  of  the   Korean
War,   out  of  print  since   1953   and  long  a   col-
lector's  item,  is  being  republished   in  September
by  Monthly  Review  Press  in  hard  cover  at  $7.50.
W  are  offering  it  to  readers  pre-publication  at
$6.50.
The  last  remaining  copies  of  the  British   edi-
tion  of  Stone's  Haunted  Fifties,  long  out  of  print
in  this  country,  have  arrived  from  England   and
are  available  at  the  original  price  $4.95.   Send
your  orders with  check  to  Stone's  Weekly, 4420
29th   St.,   N.W.,    Washington,   D.C.   20008.
Five of the  Largest  ABM Contractors  Signed  and  Bankrolled That  84% Pro-ABM Ad
When   Wm.  J.   Casey   was   before   the   Senate    Foreign
Relations  Committee  July  9,  Senator  Symington  asked  him
whether  he  thought  it  was  proper  for  heads  of  companies
"getting  millions  of  dollars  to  build  the  ABM  system"  to
sign  that  full  page  ad  "84% Of  All  Americans  Support  An
ABM  System"  which Casey's  "Citizens  Committee for  Peace
With  Security"  placed  in  leading  U.S.  newspapers  June  30.
Casey   replied   that  he  would  "really   be  surprised"  if   this
were  true  because  "we  made  a  conscious  effort  to  form  this
committee  from  among  those  who did not  have  any  interest
in  Safeguard  or  any  other  major  defense  interests."  When
Senator  Javits  came  to  Casey's  defense,  Casey  even  offered
to  ask  Symington  who  these  persons  were  and  return  any
money  they  contributed.
Senator   Fulbright  then  put  into  the  record  the  names
of   11  signers   who  are  directors   or   top   executives   of   8
companies  which  hold  more  than  $150  million  in  contracts
between  them  on  the  ABM.  Five—IBM,  Motorola,  Martin-
Marietta,   General  Electric   and   Sperry-Rand—are   among
the   12   largest   ABM   contractors.    The   other   three   are
Lockheed   Aircraft,  Brunswick  Corporation  and  American
Machine  & Foundry.  Fulbright  suggested  that  since   Casey's
committee  was  so  anxious  to  inform   the  public,  it  might
have  added  a  footnote  to  its  ad  explaining  that  11  signers
had this  $150 million  interest.
Nixon   has   nominated  Casey   to   the   General  Advisory
Committee   of   the   U.S.   Arms  Control   and  Disarmament
Agency.   We  hope  the  advice  he  gives  the  Agency  is  not
on   a   par  with   the   statements   made  in   his   advertising.
Fulbright  got  Casey  to  admit  serious  mistatements,   notably
that  "the  Russians  have  already  deployed  their  own  ABM
system—giving   protection  to   their   strike   force."    Casey
admitted   "that   is   not  the  case"   and  called  the   assertion
"a  little  fuzzy."  Fulbright  called  it  untrue.
Casey  declared himself as  innocently unaware when  asked
how  it  was  possible  for  his  public opinion  survey  to  declare
84%   of    the   American  people   for    an    ABM   when   the
Gallup   poll  showed  25'<  in  favor  and   15%  opposed   and
the  majority  either  with  no  opinion  or  insufficient   knowl-
edge.   The  way  the  poll  was  loaded  for  Casey's   committee
was  rather  queasily  admitted  by  the  head  of   Opinion  Re-
search   Corporation  in  a   letter   to   the   Washington   Post
July  18.   The  affair  deserves  a  fuller  airing  when  Casey's
name  comes  up  for  Senate  confirmation.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  28,  1969
The  Enemies  of Liberty  At  Home  Are  the  First  to  Crusade  for  It  Abroad
(Continued  From  Page  One)
goes"  will  some   day  be  the   whole   planet   going   up   in  a
forest  of  mushroom  clouds.
Basic  Issue  Philosophical
The  basic  issue  is  philosophical,  not  technological.   If   the
philosophical   premises   are   those   of   the  military,  the   tech-
nological  argument  cannot  be  won.   It   is  not  just  that  the
military  can  reveal  what  suits  them  and  censor  what  doesn't.
In   a  world   conceived   as  a  melodramatic  confrontation   be-
tween  Good  and  Evil,  it  will  always  seem  more   "prudent"
to  run  the  risk  of  wasting  a  few  more  billions of  dollars  than
sudden  apoclayptic  destruction  one  dark  night.
"Perhaps  the  worst  implication  of  the  ABM  debate,"  Sen-
ator  Young  of   Ohio   said  July  14,  "is  the   fact   that  it  will
help  to  continue  the  deception  that  there  is  a  technical  solu-
tion   to   the   dilemma  of   the   nuclear   age.    This   false  hope
would  be  extremely  dangerous  if  it  diverted  us  from  efforts  to
find  a  solution  in  the  only  place  where  it  may  be  found—in
a  political  and   diplomatic  search   for   peace  combined   with
arms  limitation  and  disarmament measures."   This  the  Penta-
gon  fears  far  more  than  Communism.   The  menace  of  Com-
unism  is  its  necessary  twin,  the  vital  element  without  which
its  dramaturgy  would   collapse.    Its   real   enemy  is   a  world
without  an  arms  race,  a  world   freed   from  the  fear  of  war.
The  men  to  watch  are  those  who  would  cloak  the  military
in  the  shining   armor   of  another   crusade  for   liberty.    After
Jackson's   speech  July  9,  Fulbright  said  soberly   "all   we  are
doing  is following the  traditional way of  dealing with possible
enemies  by building  more  and  more  arms."   Jackson  responded
in  language  which  has  so  often   led  humanity  to  destruction.
"The    basic  problem,"   he   replied,   "is   not   new.    It   is   the
Billion  Dollar  Rat  Race
"We  are  caught  up  in  a  sequence   of  technology  de-
velopments  without  any  logical  end.   The  first  step  in
this   sequence   was  the   ballistic   missile.   The  second
step  is  the  anti-ballistic  missile.   The  third  is  the  anti-
anti-ballistic   missile   or  MIRY  as   we  usually   call   it.
In  this  sequence  each  step  is  more  pointless  and  more
treacherous   than  the  one  before   it.   If  we  continue   to
put  all  our  faith  in  seeking  security  through   military
technology,   we  shall   soon   discover   what   the   fourth
step  is,  but  we  shall   be  still   further   from   achieving
genuine  national   security."
—Dr.  Herbert   York,   Prof,   of  fhysics   at  La   Jolla,
member  of   the  President's   Science  Advisory   Commit-
tee  1957-67,  before   Senate   Foreign  Relations  July   16.
Chrm.  FULBRIGHT:  Do  I  gather  that  you  gentle-
men   believe   that   MIRY   is   much   more   likely   to   be
made  effective  than  this  ABM  and  this  would   mean
that  MIRY  can  destroy  the  land-based  missiles  of  the
other  side  which,  in  effect,   leads  me  to  believe  that
land-based   missiles,  Minutemen,  are   an  obsolete   con-
cept?
Dr. YORK: Yes,  may I—
Chrm.  FULBRIGHT: That  we  are  building  an  ABM
to  preserve   an  obsolete   missile,  that  we  ought  to  get
rid  of  both  of  them  and  try,  if  we  are  going  to  have
missiles,  have  them  in  the  ocean  or  some  other   place.
Dr.  YORK:  That  is  the  next  layer  of  the  onion.
—Foreign  Relations  Committee  Same   Day.
*  "The  magnitude  of  the  asserted  threat," says  the  Syming-
ton- Young-Inouye  minority   report  against  ABM,  "has  been
declassified,   but   the   Defense    Department   has   consistently
refused   to  release  classified  information  presented  the  com-
mittee   which  to   us  presents  conclusively    that   a   small   in-
crease  in  Soviet  SS-9   missile  production  would  eliminate  any
significant  protection  by  this  ABM system  even  if  it  worked."
That's  what  the  Senate's  secret  session  was  about.
age-old   problem   of   preserving   and   nourishing   individual
liberty."  It  was the  ultimate in  irony to hear  Jackson  complain
that  "liberals  are  slandered"  in  the  Soviet  Union  and   "travel
abroad  is  denied  dissenters"  and  to  see  Tower   of  Texas  rise
to  congratulate   him.   We  never  knew  they  cared.   Jackson's
comrade-in-arms,   Nixon,   launched   his   career   by  slandering
liberals  and  was  Vice  President  of  an  Administration which
denied  dissenters  the  right  to  travel.   The  new  repression  re-
viving  under  Nixon   bears  a   strong   family   resemblance   to
the  reviving Stalinism  Jackson  deplores  in  the  Soviet  Union.
The  military  machines and  their  Pied  Pipers  are  the  first  on
both   sides  to  urge   "liberation"   abroad  while   imposing   op-
pression  at   home.
The  Weekly  Is  Not  Published  in  August—Next  Issue  Goes to  Press  Sept.  2
I.  F.  Stone  will  be  on  the  Dick  Cavett  Show,  ABC-TV,  again  Aug.   22  at   10  p.m.  EOT
I. E  Stone's Weekly                    "
FOR
For   the   enclosed S
A Time of  Tormen
Street
City
Indicate   if
Please  renew   (or
Street
City
I.
4420  29th  St.
STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
16.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
t  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
Zip                State
gift   announcement  wished  Q
enter)   a  sub  for  the   enclosed   $5:
Zip                State
F.  Stone's  Weekly                    7/28/69
N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I   F   Stone's  Weekly    2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,   N.W.,   Washington,   D.C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  {5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in   Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:   {17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED