I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969sep22.pdf

============================================================

Military-Industrial    Victories  in  the Senate, Pps. 2-3
No,  But  A  Little  Celebration  in  Saigon  Could  Easily Be Arranged
"Would   the   North  Vietnamese   and  the   Viet   Cong   observe  a  three-day  truce  if  I  were  to  die?"
—Remark   Thieu  was  reported  to  have  made  when  U.S.  Ambassador  Berger  and  Gen.  Abrams  pressed-him   to  go
along  with  the  S-day  truce  for  Ho  Chi  Minh  according  to  Donald. Kirk  from  Saigon,  in  the  Washington  Star,  Sept.  9.
L F. Stone?s  Weekly
Now Published
\/OOIOI\1                           ^^
VOL  XVII,  NO.  17
SEPTEMBER  22,  1969
101
      WASHINGTON, D. C.
20  CENTS
The  Con  Game  of "Withdrawal" From  Vietnam
On   short   range,   as  in  the   case  of  the   36-hour   cessation
of  B-52  bombings,  the  answer  to  the  question  puzzling  the
whole   press  corps—what   is  Nixon   doing?—is   (I   suspect)
quite  simple.   He  doesn't   know.   He  is  thrashing  about  like
a  fish  on  a  hook,  trying  desperately  to  find  some  way  to  get
off.   He  is  obviously hearing  contradictory  advice from civilian
and  military  sources,  and  he  vaccilates,  apparently  depending
on  who  talks  to  him  last.   If  you  look  back,  vaccilation  is  the
chief  characteristic  of  this  Administration,  not  only  on  Viet-
nam  but  on  almost  every question  of  policy,  from  tax  reform
through  hunger  to  school  desegregation.   Nixon  even  changes
his  mind  about  appointments  when  they  seem  to  have  been
firmly  made,  as  in  the  Knowles  case.   The  tiller  of  the  ship
of  State  has  rarely  had  a  more  unsteady  hand  upon  it.*
The  Strategy  Goes  Back  To  LBJ
When  looked  at  from  a  longer  perspective,  however,  Nix-
on's  course on Vietnam,  is not  a thing of  fits  and  starts.  It  was
first projected  by the  Johnson  Administration  in  1968,  and  he
is continuing  it.   A  high  Pentagon  official  phrased  it  very suc-
cinctly  at  the  time  to  a  friend  of  mine.   "We   are  going  to
reduce  the  fighting,"  this  military  man  said,  "to  a  level  the
American  public will  tolerate  for  a long pull." The  new  course
then  charted  was aimed not  at  negotiations with  Hanoi  or even
at  the'"Vietnamization"   of  the  war  but  at  mollifying,  or  con-
ning,  American  public  opinion.   For  the  Pentagon   the  main
enemy  is  American  public  opinion  and  its  "impatience"   and
even—for  some  silly  Generals—democracy  itself,  as the  means
by  which  that  impatience  expresses  itself**.   The  course  of
events  becomes  clearer  if  one  keeps  in  mind  that  the  Vietnam
strategy  is  primarily  concerned  neither  with  making  war  nor
peace  but  with  public  relations—a  "snow  job"  to  quiet  unrest
at  home  while  pursuing  the  same  objective  in  Vietnam.  This
is  a  Korean  solution.   The  objective  is  a  right-wing  satellite
regime,  run  by the  native military with  a  constitutional  facade
but  little  or  no  civil  liberty,  in  South  Vietnam  as  in  South
* To  imagine  that  the  B-52  "signal",  if  such  it  was,  would
get  through  one  would  have  to  believe  (1)   that  Hanoi  can
read  Nixon's  mind  better  and  faster  than  Washington   can,
and  (2)  that  its  communications  with  the  guerrillas  scattered
around  the  South  is  far  swifter  than  our  super-duper   elec-
tronic   communications   proved   to   be  in   the   Pueblo   affair.
** Two or  three  Generals  apparently   have  told  dinner  part-
ners  hereabouts  that  there   would   be  no  elections   in   1972
because  the  military  were  going  to  end  all  this  "turmoil"
by taking  over!
5  *
Strange  Way  To  Cut  Back
We  can't  read  President  Nixon's  mind  and  we  have
long   ago   given   up  trying   to   understand   Pentagon
arithmetic.    But   when   the   October   draft   calls   were
announced  we  checked   back  and  found  that  draft  calk
are  up  more  than  70%  since  Nixon  at  the  beginning
of   June   announced   Vietnamese  . troop  cutbacks   were
to  begin.   Here  are  the  figures  month  by  month:
1968                    1969
June                                        20,000                 25,900
July                                         15,000                 22,300
August                                   18,300                 29,500
September                            12,200                 29,000
October                             13,800               29,000
Total                               79,300               135,700
Korea.   To  keep  it  in  power  we  are  prepared  to  maintain  a
reduced  but  considerable  number  of  troops  there indefinitely,
as  we  do  in  Korea  15  years  after  the  war  ended.   The  55,000
U.S.  troops  still  there  cost  us  $600  million  a  year  to maintain.
Though   never  publicly  debated,   the   main   lines   of   this
program  have  surfaced   in  the  past  year.   Herman  Kahn  has
had  a  secret  withdrawal "scenario"  floating  around  tpwn.   Its
content  was  indicated  in  his  article  "If   Negotiations  Fail"
in  the  July  1968  Foreign  Affairs    quarterly where  he  proposed
that  we  appease  opinion  by  Vietnamizing the  war,  reducing
U.S.  forces  "in  the  next  two  or  three  years  to  between  two
and  three  hundred  thousand  men"  while keeping  two  or  three
combat  divisions in  South  Vietnam  for  a  considerable period
in  order   to  "deter   a  resumption  of  major  hostilities."    The
same  idea   reappeared   in   Secretary  Laird's  recent  interview
with   Time   magazine   (Aug.   29)   when  he   suggested   U.S.
forces  "could  be  cut  in  half,  to  about  250,000  men,  and  kept
in  South  Vietnam  for  an  extended  period."   Many  columnists
have  picked  up  similar forecasts and  US.  News  &  World  Re-
port  (Sept.  22)   said  Nixon's  hope  last  spring  "was  to  have
almost  all   250,000  U.S.  combat  troops  out  of   Vietnam  by
the   end   of   1970.    That   would   leave   slightly   fewer   than
300,000   support   troops  in  the  war  zone."
This   is  the  plan  Nixon   was  following  in  announcing  a
second   reduction   of   35,000   troops  by  December   15.   This
would   still   leave  484,000   troops   in   Vietnam   plus   28,000
Naval  personnel  and  about 45,000  Air  Force  men  in Thailand.
This  adds  up  to  557,000  men tied  down  in  the  Vietnam war.
Nixon's  first  two  cuts  total  60,000  men.   The  Baltimore  Sun
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, Sept.  eg, 1969
Despite  the  Scandalous  Costs  of  the   C-5A,   the  Senate  Voted  for  It     ...
EARLIER   THIS   YEAR   THE   PROXMIRE   HEARINGS   put    the
C-5A   on  the  front  pages.   This  giant  cargo  plane  being  built
by   Lockheed   became   the   classic   example   of    cost-overruns
at  the  Pentagon.    The  target  price  for  the  six  squadrons  of
115  planes   was  little  more  than   $3  billion.    It  turned  out
that  the  planes   would   cost   some  $2  billion   more,  or   $5.2
billion.   Any private  business  operating  so sloppily  would  soon
be   bankrupt    Yet   the   Proxmire   amendment   on  the   C-5A
to  the  military  authorization  bill  was  defeated  64  to  23.   All
this  amendment  called  for  was  a  reduction  of  $533  million
in  further  procurement  of  this  plane  pending  a  comprehensive
study   of   its  cost   by  the   General   Accounting   Office.     The
report  had  to  be  ready  in  90  days,  and   Congress  would  be
free  thereafter   to  authorize  further  purchases  if  it  then   felt
this  was warranted.
Back  At  The  Old  Stand
Yet  Senators  like  Javits,  Muskie,   Gore,   Percy  and  Pack-
wood  voted  against  Proxmire.   Fulbright,  Kennedy,  Hart  and
Ellender   spoke   for   the   amendment.    The   Senator   who  did
most  to  defeat   the  amendment  was  Symington,  back  in  his
old  stance  as  an  Air  Force  advocate,  with  the   specious   plea
that  the  C-5A  would   make  it  possible  to  withdraw   troops
from   abroad.    "I   want   to  say  here  and   now,"   Symington
declared   in   a  moment   of   unconscious   satire,   "that   people
who   really  mean   it  when   they  say  we  should   bring   these
troops  home,  had  better  provide  for  the  airlift   because  you
are  not  going  to  be  able  to  bring  them  home  until  you  have
some  means  to  send  them  back."    It  was  alarming  that  Sy-
mington,   who   is   preparing   hearings   supposedly    designed
to  cut  down  U.S.  commitments  abroad,  is  still  wedded  to  the
conception   of   a   Pax   Americana,   albeit   enforced   by   swift
airlift  rather than  foreign  bases.   That way lies more  Vietnams.
Fulbright  in  supporting  the  Proxmire  amendment   recalled
what  Russell  of   Georgia   said  a  few  years  ago  in   blocking
appropriations   for   FDLs—"fast   deployment  logistics  ships"
—another  McNamara  idea  for  implementing  the  Pax  Ameri-
cana.   These  were  to  be  a  kind  of  floating  base,  loaded  with
equipment  and  ready  for  use  in  sudden  interventions.   Rus-
sell  said,  "if   they  can  intervene,  they  will  intervene."    Ful-
bright  said  this  applied  equally  to  the  C-5A.   Russell  voted
to  another  tune  this  time.   The  C-5A  is  being  built  by  Lock-
Three  Ways  to  Measure  the  U.S.  Arms  Effort
Three  items  may help  readers  measure the  U.S. arms
effort.   In  the  Senate  Sept.  12  McGovern,  in  his  speech
against  the  new  manned  bomber, said  we  were  spend-
ing  "far  more  thaji  China  and  the  Soviet  Union  com-
bined."  At  this  point Senator  Proxmire interjected  that
the   Institute   of   Strategic   Studies   in   London,   after
analyzing  the  difference  in  costs  and  military  pay  be-
tween  the  two  countries,   estimated   that   Russia's   20
billion   ruble   arms   budget   is   the   equivalent  of   $40
billion  spending in  the  U.S.  or  one-half  our  $80  billion
military  budget.  As  for  China, its  entire  gross  national
product—the   Institute   reported—is   only   $20   billion
more  than  our  military  budget alone.
The  second  item  turned  up  in  Herman  Kahn's  plea
for  Nixon's  ABM  in  the   pro-ABM  book  Why   ABM?
(Pergamon  Press).  In  arguing  that  the  Soviets  would
be  unlikely  to  give  up  an  ABM  altogether,  Kahn  dis-
closed  some  interesting   figures   to  show  how  defense-
minded  they  are.  "We  have  in  the  past,"  Kahn  wrote,
"spent  something  like  3 or 4 dollars  on offense to every
one  on defense;  the  Soviets  have  probably spent  some-
thing   like  3  or  4   to   one  on  defense   over  offense."
This  also  indicates  who  has  been  threatening  whom.
The  third item:  The  AEC  Sept.  11  announced  that  it
had   monitored  a  Soviet   underground  nuclear  test  of
low   yield   (less   than   20   kilotons),   the   28th   under-
ground  nuclear test  since  the  ban on  atmospheric  tests
went  into  effect  in  1963.  We  phoned  the  AEC  to  ask
how   many   underground  tests  the   U.S.   had  made  in
the   same   period.   The   answer  was   186  "announced
tests."   The  total  number  is  classified.   Even  the  an-
nounced  number  is  more  than  6
r
/
2
  times  as  many  as
the  Soviet  total.   These  tests  are  used  to  develop new
nuclear  weapons, like  the  ABM  and  the   MIRV.   The
tempo  of  our  effort  is  obviously  many  times  theirs.
heed  at  Marietta,  in  Russell's  native  Georgia.
THE  OPPONENTS  OF  THE  MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL   complex
were   equally   unsuccessful   with   the   Mondale-Case   amend-
ment  to  block  $377  million  of  new  funds  for  a  third  nuclear
aircraft   carrier  pending   a  study  of   its  effectiveness  by  the
GAO   and   'the  Congress.    The   best   .they   could   do   on   one
motion  in  a  tangled   parliamentary   situation  was  34  to.  51.
This  time  Symington  voted  with  the  opposition  but  again  as
an  Air  Force  man.   He  asked  Case  of  New  Jersey  whether
it   did   not   give   him   "some   apprehension   .that   die   Soviet
How  The  National  Archives  Here  in  Washington  Unwittingly  Honors  Ho's  Passing
De  Gaulle  cleared  the  way   to  end  the  war  in  Algeria
by  calling   for   "a  peace  of   the  brave."   This  salute   of  a
soldier  to  a  valiant  foe  made it  easier  to  bridge the  bitter-
ness  and sit  down  together.   Senator  Fulbright was advocat-
ing  a  similar  gesture  of  magnanimity when  he  suggested
in  a  letter  to  President  Nixon  that  the  U.S.  send  a  repre-
sentative   to  the  funeral  of   Ho  Chi  Minh.   Fulbright   dis-
closed  to  Ted  Knap  of  Scripps  Howard  (Washington Daily
News,  Sept.   10)  that  the   idea   was  turned  down  as  "in-
advisable."    So   noble   a   tribute   to   Ho's   memory   would
have  struck  a  chord  of   sympathy  in  Saigon   as  well   as
Hanoi.    The  censored   Saigon   press   was   not   allowed  to
express   popular  feeling.    But  the  night  after   Ho's  death
a   CBS  reporter  astyed  passersby   on  the  street   in  Saigon
what they  though of  Ho.  All  spoke  with respect  and regret.
"Many  South  Vietnamese," the  Baltimore  Sun's correspond-
ent   John   E.   Woodruff   cabled  Sept.   11  after  a  trip  into
the  Delta,  "Secretly   Mourn  Ho."
In  Paris  Le  Monde  (Sept.  5)  reported  that  a  number  of
South   Vietnamese   deputies   had   even   proposed   to   the
President   of   the   National   Assembly   in   Saigon   that   a
parliamentary  delegation  attend  the  funeral  rites  in  Hanoi.
Among  tributes  obtained  by  the  French  press  agency  from
political  leaders  in  Saigon  was  one  from  M.  Nguyen  Xnan
Oanh,  who  was  Vice  President   under  General  Khanh.   He
said  Ho  "could  have  been  the  Tito  of  Asia."
Strangest   of   all,   Ho   Chi  Minh's  historic   petition   to
Woodrow   Wilson  in  1919  is   on  display  here  at   the   Na-
tional  Archives,  almost  unnoticed,  as   part  of   an  exhibit
unveiled  earlier  this  year  to  commemorate  the  50th  anni-
versary  of  the  Versailles  Peace  Conference.   Ho  sent   the
petition  because  he  and  the  Vietnamese  people  took  seri-
ously  Wilson's  promise  of  self-determination  as  they  took
seriously  the  Atlantic  Charter's  similar  promises  of  colonial
freedom  during  World  War  II.   Both  times  they  were  dis-
appointed.   We  reprint  the  petition  on  the  next  page.  How
much  suffering  might  have  been  averted  if  Ho's  moderate
appeal  had been  granted  fifty  years  ago!
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  Sept. 22,1969
...  And  Carriers,  Obsolete  But Expensive  Toys  for Admirals  Also Win  Out
Union  today  has  hundreds  more  attack  submarines  than  the
U.S.   and   thousands   more  modern   air   superiority   fighters"
but  "has  not  yet  laid  down  a  single  carrier?"   The  implica-
tion  was  that  we  were  wasting  money  on  carriers  when  we
should   be   building   more   fighter   planes   and   submarines.
This  is  hardly  an  anti-arms  race  point  of  view.
The   aircraft   carrier   is   as  obsolete  as  the   battleship,  of
which   it   is  the   lineal   descendant.    Indeed   the   debate   un-
earthed  the   fact   that   the  only  reason  we  have   15   aircraft
carriers  is  that  we  were  allowed   15  battleships  in  the  1921
naval  agreement  among  Britain,  Japan   and  the   U.S.   Each
nuclear   carrier   task   force,   which   includes   four   destroyers,
costs  more  than   $1.4  billion.   The  U.S.  carrier   forces   last
fiscal year  consumed  40%  of  the  Navy's  $21  billion  budget.
They  are a  rich  nation's  luxury.  Neither  China  nor  the  Soviet
Union  is  building  a  carrier.   Britain  is  phasing  out  its  car-
riers.   France  is  the  only  other  nation  maintaining  them.
No  Wonder  They're  Unscathed
Carriers  have  been  used  to  bomb  North  Vietnam,  which
has   neither   the   planes   nor  the   submarines   to   sink  them.
Against  any  major  enemy,  they  would  be  easy  targets.   Ad-
miral  Moorer,  Chief  of  Naval  Operations,  told  the  Veterans
of  Foreign  Wars recently  that  "in  some  50  wars  or  near  wars
since   1946,   we  have  not  lost  a  carrier:"    When  Mondale
finally  managed  to  get  a  list  of  these  "wars  or  near  wars"
out  of  the  Pentagon,  it  became  clear  why  the  carriers  were
unscathed.   All  the  "wars"  were  minor.   In  some  cases  the
carriers  had   only   been   "alerted"   in  Norfolk   thousands  of
miles   away.    In   others   the   carriers   "showed  the   flag"   off
Loas,  which  has  no  coast;  in  the  Zanzibar  riots,  where  the
"enemy"  couldn't  have  sunk  a  rowboat;  or   off  Guatemala,
which  has  no  Navy.   For   such  "wars"  coast  guard   cutters
would  have  been  ample.
After  the  Navy  repulsed  the  attack  on  these  expensive  toys,
McGovern   (with   Goodell,  Hatfield   and   Proxmire)   moved
an  amendment  to  cut  $80  million   from   the   $100  million
asked  to  speed  development  of  a  new  manned  bomber.  This
is  another  luxury,   an  indulgence  for   the   bomber   Generals
as  the  carrier  is  for   the  battleship  Admirals.   The   cost  of
Fresh  Peek  Into  A  Dark  Corner
Last  April  21,  in  an  article  "THe Best  Kept  Secret
of  the  Vietnam  War",  the  Weekly  called  attention   to
passages   in  Westmoreland's  report  on  the  war  which
disclose  that  in  1965  the  U.S.  put  combat  troops  into
South  Vietnam  not  at  the  request   of  its   government
but   on  our  own   initiative,  and  that   Saigon   in   1965
while   acquiescing   tried   to   keep   U.S.   troops   in   the
sparsely  populated Highlands and away  from  the  cities.
We  believe  that   when  the  truth   becomes   known,  we
will  find  that  the  U.S.  "Americanized"  the  war  in  1965
because   we   feared   Saigon's   last   civilian  government
(overthrown  in  June,  1965)  might  make  peace.
It  now  turns  out  that  on  May  12,  after  reading  the
Westmoreland   report,   Senator   Fulbright   asked   the
State  Department  whether  it  had  any  record  of  a  for-
mal  request  from  Saigon  for  U.S.  combat  troops.   He
received  a  reply  dated  Sept.  2  and  made  it   public  in
the  Senate   Sept.  12  (Con.  Rec.  S10509).  The  Depart-
ment's  reply  was  verbose  and  evasive,  but  nevertheless
revealed  that  after  four  months  of  search  it  could find
no  such  request.   We  think  it  time  the  bigger   news-
papers   of   this   country   dug  into   this   curious  story.
the  AMSA   (Advanced  Manned  Strategic  Aircraft)   will  be
around  $12  billion,  as  much  as  the  ABM.  Russia  stopped
building  new  strategic  bombers  years  ago  to  concentrate  on
the  missile.   We   have  been  spending  billions  not   only  on
bombers  but  on  defenses  against  a virtually  non-existent Soviet
bomber  threat.   The  vote  on  the  McGovern  amendment  had
not   yet  been   taken  before   we  went   to  press  Sept.   16  but
its  chances  were  slim.
It   is  hopeful   that  Congress  is  at  last,  for   the  first  time,
debating  these  wasteful  military  baubles.   It  is  disappointing
that the  results are so meager.  The  "down payments" on ABM,
bombers,  carriers  and  Pax  Americana  cargo  planes  may  ulti-
mately   involve  $100  billion   in  expenditures  over   the  next
10  years.   With  such  funds,  we  could  build  a  new  America,
free  of  poverty.
We  mark  with  sorrow  the  death  of  Drew  Pearson,  a
great   maverick  journalist   of   conscience   and   devotion.
Full  Text  of  He's  Petition  to  Woodrow Wilson  at  the  Paris  Peace  Conference  in  1919
"Since  the  victory  of  the  Allies,  all  the  subject  peoples
are  frantic  with  hope  at  the  prospect   of  an  era  of  right
and  justice  which  should  begin  for  them  by  virtue  of  the
formal   and  solemn   engagements,    made  before   the  whole
world  by  the  various   powers  of  the  Entente   (Allies)   in
the  struggle   of  civilization  against  barbarism.
"While  waiting  for  the   principle  of   national   self-deter-
mination  to  pass  from  ideal  to  reality   through  the   effec-
tive  recognition  of  the  sacred  right  of  all  peoples  to  decide
their  own  destiny,  the  inhabitants  of  the  ancient   Empire
of  Annam,  at  the  present  time  French  Indo-China,  present
to  the  noble  Governments  of  the  Entente   in  general  and
in   particular   to   the   honorable   French   Government   the
following  humble claims:
"1)  General  amnesty  for  all  the  native  people  who  have
been  condemned  for  political  activity;  2)  Reform  of  Indo-
Chinese   justice   by  granting   to   the  native   population  the
same  judicial  guarantees  as  the  Europeans   have,  and  the
total  suppression   of  the  special   courts  which  are   instru-
ments   of   terrorization   and  oppression,   against  the   most
responsible  elements  of  the  Annamite  people;  3)   Freedom
of   press   and  speech;  4)   Freedom   of  association  and  as-
sembly;  5)   Freedom  to   emigrate   and  to   travel   abroad;
6)   Freedom  of  education,   and  creation,  in  every  province
of  technical  and  professional   schools  for  the  native  popu-
lation;  7)  Replacement  of  the  regime  of  arbitrary   decrees
by  a  regime  of  law;  8)  A  permanent  delegation   of  native
people  elected   to   attend   the   French   parliament  in  order
to keep the latter  informed of their  needs.
"The  Annamite  people,  in  presenting  these  claims,  count
on  the  worldwide  justice   of   all   powers,  and  rely  in  par-
ticular  on  the   good  will  of  the  noble  French   people  who
hold   our  destiny   in  their   hands   and  who,   as   France   is
a   republic,  have  taken  us  under  their   protection.    In  re-
questing   the  protection   of  the   French   people,  the   people
of   Annam,  far   from   feeling   humiliated,  on  the   contrary
consider  themselves   honored,  because   they  know  that   the
French  people  stand  for  liberty  and  justice.and  will  never
renounce   their   sublime   ideal   of    universal    brotherhood.
Consequently  in  giving  heed  to  the  voice  of  the   oppressed,
the  French  people  will  be  doing  their  duty  to  France  and
humanity."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  Sept.  S3,1969
At  the  Best  We  Could  Still  Be  Spending  $10 Billion  A  Year  in  Vietnam
{Continued  From Page  One)
Sept.  16  quoted  a  "high-ranking  American  official   in  Saigon
whose  views  have  been  heard  personally  by  Mr.  Nixon"  as
having  estimated  that  100,000  men  could  be  pulled  out  with-
out  seriously  reducing  the  fighting  ability of  the  allied  forces.
One  reason,  he  said,  is that  a  number  of  soldiers  sent  to  Viet-
nam  to  build  airfields,  logistical  bases  and  outposts  finished
their  tasks  last  year.   We   are  still  a  long  way  from  a  real
reduction  in  combat   forces.
As  Deluded  As  The   Bombings
In  a  Senate  speech  Sept.  9,  on  the  eve  of  the  latest  Nixon
announcement,   Gore   attacked'  the   Administration   line   that
a   "phased   withdrawal,   coupled   with   an   unspoken   but  ob-
vious pledge that  we will  keep  enough  troops  there indefinitely
to  prevent  collapse  of  the  current  Saigon  regime,  would con-
vince  North  Vietnam  that  its  cause  is  hopeless  and  therefore
encourage  Hanoi  to  negotiate."   To  negotiate  under  such cir-
cumstances  would  be  to  accept  the  Thieu   regime  and  a  po-
litical   defeat.    "In   my  view,"   Gore   went   on,  "the  history
of  the  Vietnamese  people  does  not  support  such  a  conclusion.
They  are  accustomed  to  long  struggles,   spanning  generations
or  even  centuries."   The  policy  of  phased  withdrawal, he  de-
clared,  "holds  no  more  promise  of  success  than  did  the  policy
of  bombing  North   Vietnam."    He  said  it  might  "buy time
for  the  administration  with  the  American  people"  but  "if  it
is   used   to  tighten   our   embrace  of   the   Saigon   regime,   the
prospects  for  peace  will  be  dim  indeed."   Fulbright,   support-
ing  Gore,  made  the  essential  point  when  he  told  the   Senate,
"It  does  not  matter  how  much  we  talk  about  settlement, the.
war  cannot  be  settled  as  long  as  we  insist  upon  maintaining
the   puppet   government   in   South   Vietnam."    But  that   has
always   been  the   Johnson-Nixon   strategy,   and   that   is  their
common  conception   of  an  "honorable   peace."
The  peace movement  is  slowly waking  up  to  this  con  game,
but  it's going   to  have  to  embark  on  a  campaign   of  public
education  to  thwart  it.   Even  if  this  scenario  worked,  and  we
cut   our   troops—and   the   cost   of   the   Vietnamese   war—in
half,  we'd still  be  stuck  for  $12  to  $15  billion   a  year  in-
definitely  in  Vietnam.   Our  military  still  have  a  low  opinion
of  the  South  Vietnamese  army;  at  the  best,  it  will  be  years
before   it   can   do   without  U.S. air,  artillery   and    logistics
The  Rat-Hole  Economics  Of  B-52  Raids
"On  Aug.  18  the  U.S. Air  Force  executed  one  of   its
most  ambitious air  raids  in  recent  weeks  over  Vietnam,
with  B-52s  dropping  some  1200  tons  of  heavy  bombs.
This  compares  closely  in  tonnage  with  the  maximum
raids  of  World War  II  over  Germany  or  Japan.   There
is  a  subtle difference,  however, which should be  pointed
out  because  it  is  a  measure  of  the  desperation  or  de-
mentia  which has  overtaken  the  present  tenants  of  the
Pentagon.   While  in  World War II  a  raid  on this  scale
cost   about  $20  million,  it   would  have  inflicted   some
30,000  casualties   and  $200   million  worth  of   physical
damage—a  fair  return  on  the  investment  by  any  logic.
On  the  other  hand,  Monday's B-52  raid,  like  its  many
recent   counterparts,   cost   some   $40  million;  but   at
best  it   wiped  out  a  few   hundred  Viet   soldiers  and
villagers  while  achieving  practically  no  damage—save
to jungle scenery.
"Oh  Lord!  Deliver  us  from  the  thrall  of  such  mili-
tary lunacy."
Francis  Morse
Associate   Professor  of  Aerospace   Engineering,  Bos-
ton  University,   in  the  Boston  Globe  Aug.  26.
support.   At  the  worst,  what  happens   if  U.S. bases  are  over-
run,   if  the   ARVN   fails  to   protect   them,   if  casualties   rise
among  the  U.S. troops  left  behind?   What  do  we  do,   send
more  troops  in   and   start   this   whole  miserable   process   all
over  again?
We   are   being   told   that   things   are  not   going   well   in
North   Vietnam.   That  may  be  true,  but  they  can  hardly  be
going  half   as  badly  as  here.   North   Vietnam   has  no   stock
and  bond  markets,   to  fall  steadily   even  as  inflation  grows.
As  this  is  written  the  financial  pages  speculate  that  the U.S.
may  have  to  pay  the  highest  interest  rates  since  the  war  of
1812—when   the   British   burned   Washington—to   refinance
debt  coming  due  next  week.   It  is  the  most  dangerous non-
sense  to  think  that  we  can  go  on  wasting  "even"  $10  billion
a  year  in  Vietnam  while  inflation  eats  away savings  and  racial-
urban  problems  eat  away  the  very  foundations  of  our   society.
The  message  we  have  to  take  to  the  country  is  that  the  war
and  the  Pentagon  have  become  the  No.  1 threat  to  American
security,  and  that  that  we  must  get  out  of  Vietnam  and  Asia
before  those  quicksands  are  our  ruination.      10 a.m.  Sept.  16
We'll  Be  Clad  to  Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Long  Stomped  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new book,  In
A Time  of Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City                                       Zip                 State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  D
Please  renew   (or  enter)  s  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City  .
Zip               State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                    9/22/69
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
/  E Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St., N.W.
Washington,   D. C.  Z0008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington.   D.C. Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.. N.W.,  Washington. D.C.
An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED