I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969jun02.pdf

============================================================

On  Burger  and  Fortas,  Pps. 2-3
Barely  Out  Of  One  Mess,  Why  Look  For   Others?
"When  our  forces  are  no longer  needed in  South Vietnam,     war  —  the  peaceful evolution of  Southeast  Asia."
we  shall  not  abandon  in  peace  what  we  have  fought  for  in         Secretary  of  Stale  Rogers  to SEATO  at  Bangkok,  May  20.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
/\/y-Ml!   Z^f J A/-»r/i/>y-f     J<*_ TT//>y5/3/*»                                 ^r
Now  Published  Bt-Weekly
VOL.   XVII, NO.  11
JUNE  2,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  B.C.
20  CENTS
Same  Old  Formulas,  Same  Tired  Rhetoric
In  an  exchange  of  toasts  at  the  White  House  last  month,
the  Australian  Prime  Minister  drew  an  implied  comparison
between  Lincoln  and  Nixon.   Walt  Rostow,  too,  used  to  get
Lyndon  Johnson's  juices  flowing  in  the morning by telling  him
he  was  just  like  Lincoln.   The  Australian  got  so  carried  away
that  he  ended  up  by  demonstrating  his  native  talent  with  the
boomerang.   If  Lincoln had  not  persevered  against the  Copper-
heads  and  the  Horace  Greeleys,  Mr.  Gorton  explained,  there
would  today  be  "a  slave autocracy in  the  South  .  .  . But there
would  have  been  no  United  States."    Since  Lincoln  and  the
North  were  trying  to  reunite  the  country  by  force  of  arms
("aggression")  against  the  wishes  of  the  Southern  states  for
independence   ("self-determination"),    Mr.   Gorton's  flattery
was  clearly  beginning  to  rebound.   The  more  he  went  on  the
more  it  sounded  like  a toast  to Ho  Chi  Minh.
If  John  Brown  Had  Succeeded
Mr.  Gorton's   analogy  invites  elaboration.    If  John   Brown
had   succeeded   in   raising  a  slave  revolt,   if   the  North  had
helped  the  rebels,  and  if  England  had  intervened  on  the  side
of  the  slaveholders   (as  the  Tories  later  wanted  to),  the  situa-
tion   would   have   been   comparable   to   the   Vietnamese   war.
Suppose  further  that  England,  tired  of  a costly  distant conflict,
had  proposed  that  all  "non-Southern"  forces  withdraw,   thus
putting  Lincoln's  Unionist  armies  in  the  same  "foreign"  cate-
gory  as  Britain's.  Suppose  the  slaves  were  asked  to  lay  down
their  arms  while  the  slaveholders  kept  their  army  intact,  and
trust  to  "free  elections" under  a vague  promise  of  international
supervision  but  with  the  slaveholder   regime   still  in   power.
Suppose  that  regime  in  Richmond  were  filling  the  jails  with
spokesmen   for   poor  white,   non-slaveholding   and   pro-peace
elements  while  Britain —  heavily  arming  this  regime  in  prep-
aration  for  its  own  troop  withdrawal  —  piously  insisted  that
its  only  purpose  was  to  give  the  South  the  right   of  self-de-
termination.   That  is  where  Nixon  stands  today.
For  those  who  wonder  just  what  Nixon  was  up  to  in  his
May  14 peace  proposals,  the  Nixon-Gorton   visit  offers  another
source   of   illumination.    Except   for   New   Zealand,   with   its
150  token  soldiers,  Australia  is  the  only  white  country  which
has put  troops  beside  our own in  the  effort  to revive  the White
Man's  Burden  in  Asia.   The  war  is  almost  as  unpopular   in
Australia  as here,  and  Gorton's  opposition  —  the  Labor  Party
—  led  the  protest  demonstrations  which  greeted  Ky  two  years
ago  in  Australia.  The  conservative coalition  Gorton  heads was
Johnson's  faithful   junior  partner.    Gorton   was  here  only  a
week  before  Nixon's  Vietnam   speech.    If  Nixon   were   con-
Hard To Tell  Apart
"If  we  simply  abandoned  our  effort   in  Vietnam,  the
cause  of  peace might  not  survive  the  damage  that  would
be  done  to  other  nations'  confidence  in  our reliability
...       it   would   enormously   increase  the  danger  of  a
bigger war  later."
—Nixon  on Vietnam,  May  H.
"From   Berlin   to   Thailand   are   people  whose  well-
being  rests,  in  part,  on  the  belief  that  they  can  count
on  us  if  they  are  attacked.  To  leave Vietnam  to  its  fate
would  shake  the  confidence  of  all  these  people  in  the
value of  an American commitment  ..   . The result would
be ...   even wider war."
—Johnson  at Johns  Hopkins,  April   7,1965.
"We  have  also  ruled  out  .  .  .  acceptance  of  terms
that  would  amount  to  a  disguised  American  defeat."
—Nixon  mi Vietnam,  May  14.
"We  will  not  withdraw  .  .  .  under  the  cloak  of  a
meaningless  agreement."    •
—Johnson  at  Johns  Hopkins,  April   7,1965.
templating  any  real  departure  in  policy,  he  would  be  leaving
Gorton   out   on   a  limb.   It   would   be  necessary  to  prepare
Australian   public  opinion.    But  nothing   in  their   exchanges
reflected  any  change  in  policy;  they  spoke  as simple-mindedly
as  Johnson  of  their  joint  effort   "to  help  South  Vietnam  pre-
serve  its  independence."
Those  who  are working themselves into  euphoria  by wishful
exegesis  of  what  Nixon  did   not   say  in  his  May   14  address
would   be  wise  to  pause  a  moment   over  what  Nixon   and
Gorton  did  not  say  in  their  exchanges  a  week  earlier.    These,
as  expected,  attracted  little  attention  in  this  country,  and  did
not  have to  take  American peace  sentiment into  account.*  The
Nixon  farewell statement, which Gorton  said was framed  with
his  agreement  and   served  as  a  final  communique,  spoke  of
their  talks  on  "Vietnam  and  regional  security."   A  continued
U.S.-Australian  protectorate  over  Southeast  Asia  was   implied.
Nixon   welcomed,   and  promised   to   support,   Australia's  de-
cision   to  keep   troops   in  Malaysia  and   Singapore  when   the
British  leave  two  years  hence,  forever  ending  the  Kipling  era
east  of  Suez.  But  not  a single word was said about  the  negotia-
tions  in  Paris,  or  the  hope  of  a  turn  toward  peace.
Nixon   like   Johnson   is  playing  for   time.    His   May   14
address  strongly  recalls  Johnson's  at  Johns  Hopkins   in  April
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
"Indeed   the  only  place  the  texts  are  available  is   in  the
Weekly  Compilation  of  Presidential  Documents  for  May  19.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  2,  1969
No  "Strict  Constructionist"  When  It  Comes  to  First  Amendment  Rights
A  Perfect   Chief   Justice  for  A  Mediocre  and  Repressive  Nixon  Era
At  an  informal  press  conference  to  explain  how  he  picked
Warren   Burger  as  Chief  Justice,  President  Nixon   was  asked
what  jurists  he  admired.   He  named  Holmes,   Brandeis,  Car-
dozo  and   Frankfurter.   There  is  faint   resemblance  between
them  and  the  men  to  whom  Nixon   says  he  first  offered   the
Chief  Justiceship:  Justice  Stewart,  Attorney  General  Mitchell,
former   Attorney  General   Brownell   and   Tom   Dewey.    The
last  three  are Nixon  cronies  and  mediocrities with  more vulgar
bias   than   legal   learning.    Brownell   is  remembered   for   his
unprincipled    "twenty   years  of   treasi V    charge   against   the
Democrats  when  he  was  Attorney  Gene.-"I.
"Faceless  Informers"  Didn't  Bother  burger
If   Nixon   has   any  real   conception   of   what   Holmes   and
Brandeis   stood   for,   he   is   certainly  making   sure   that   he
does  not  pick  anyone  remotely   like  them  for   Chief   Justice.
•His   fifth   and   final   choice,   Judge   Warren    Burger,   is   as
undistinguished   as  the  rest.   There  have   been   conservatives
of  learning  and  humanity  on  the  Court;  Mr.  Justice  Harlan
is  an  example.    But  Nixon's   choices   are  not  on  that   level.
The    circumstances   which   first   brought    Burger   to   public
attention   are   indicative.   When   Solicitor   General   Simon  E.
Sobeloff    refused   back   in   the   haunted   Fifties   to   sign   the
government's    brief    in   the   Peters   loyalty   case   because   it
rested   on   the   use  of   "faceless  informers",   Burger   then   in
the  Justice  Department   stepped  forward  to  argue  (and   lose)
the  case  against  Thurman   Arnold  and  Abe  Fortas.   In   1956
Eisenhower   named   both   Sobeloff   and   Burger   to   the   Court
of  Appeals,   the  latter   in  the  District  of   Columbia.
The  Court  of  Appeals  in  the  District  of  Columbia  is unusual
in  that  it  deals  like  a  State  appellate  court  with  a  wide  range
of   criminal  cases.   Under   Chief  Judge  Bazelon,   and  before
him  Edgerton,  it  has  distinguished  itself  by  its  liberalism, by
its  concern  for  the  rights  of  the  poor   and  ignorant  and  by
its  pioneer  rulings  in  the  field  of  insanity.  Burger  has  con-
sistently   dissented  from  all  that   was  good   and   humane  in
that  record.   And  unlike  Judge  Friendly  in  New  York,  who
shares  the  same  biases,  Burger  has  done  so  with  little  learn-
ing  or  distinction.
Our  Other  and  Nearer  Moonscape
Mr.  ANDREWS   (D-Ala.):  Why  has  the  flying   hour
program   increased  so  drastically   when  we  have  ceased
bombing  North  Vietnam?
Gen.   D.   L.   CROW   (Budget    Dir.   Air   Force):   The
biggest  single  increase  has  been  in  the  B-52s  and  their
supporting    KC-135s   [refueling  planes]  .  .  .  increasing
the   B-52   sortie  rate   first   from   1200   to   1400,   subse-
quently   to   1600   and  currently   to   1800    [per   month].
Mr.  ANDREWS:   I  am  wondering   how  much   longer
South  Vietnam  can  stand  up  under  these  bombardments
from  B-52s  .  .  .  Do  these  bombs  make  craters?
Gen.   CROW:   The   best   description    of   that   terrain
after  the  B-52  bombardments   is  that  it  looked  like  the
surface  of  the  moon.
Mr.   ANDREWS:   You   say   we   have   already   used
more  bombs  than  we  did  in  World  War  II,  in  a  relatively
small  country.    I  wonder   how  it  is  going  to  look  when
we  get  through  over  there.   Will  it  be  habitable?
—p.   296  House   Appropriations   hearings   on  the   19S9
3d  supplemental,   Released  May  17.   Gen.  Crow    testified
(p.   295)   it   -now  costs  $M6  an  hour  for   fuel   alone  to
fly  a   B-52.
His  latest  reversal  (April  21)   by  the  Supreme  Court  was
for   an   over-wrought  and   pompous   decision  upholding   the
conviction   of   Robert  Watts,   a  young   black,  for    "threaten-
ing   the   life   of   the  President"   by  a   silly   remark  an  Army
counter-intelligence   spy  overheard.   The   Supreme  Court   re-
versed   without  hearing  argument.   It  held   that   the  remark
was   no   more   than   "political   hyperbole."     Justice   Douglas
wrote  an  amusing  concurring  opinion  on  the  history  of  such
prosecutions  in  the  earlier  English  common   law.
Nixon  in  the  campaign  said  he  wanted  Judges  who  would
be  "strict  obstructionists."   In  political  controversy  this  has
usually  come  to  mean  men  who  will  construe  the  constitu-
tion  strictly  or  loosely  against  the  rights  of  man  and  for   the
rights  of   property.   The   Watts   case  is  a  warning  that   the
new   Chief   Justice,  unlike  Holmes   and   Brandeis,  will   not
construe  the   First  Amendment  strictly  where  free   speech   is
concerned.   He  promises  to  be  the  perfect  Chief   Justice  for
a  mediocre  and  repressive Nixon  era.
Secret  And  Censored  Testimony  Indicates
Mr.  ANDREWS  (D.  Ala.):  When  you  projected  your   1969
budget,  how  many  did  you  budget  for  Southeast  Asia?
Gen.  L.  B. TAYLOR  (Dir.  Army  Budget): We  had planned
on  an  Army  end-strength  in  Vietnam  of   [censored].
Mr.  ANDREWS:  That  increase  is   17,400  over  the  figure
which  you  mentioned  several  times  in  your  statement?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  That  is  correct,   sir.
Mr.  ANDREWS:  Were  those  17,400  sent  there  as  replace-
ments  or  sent  there  to  add  to  the  [censored] ?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  They  were  additive.
Mr.  ANDREWS:  Do   you  have  any  plans  to   send   any
more  there  in  the  near  future?
Gen.  TAYLOR:   I  think  it  goes  up  approximately     [cen-
sored]  in  the  next  fiscal  year,  Mr.  Chairman.
Mr.  ANDREWS:  We  are  still  having  a  buildup   there  as
far  as  the  Army  is  concerned?
Gen.    TAYLOR:    Yes   sir;    to   reach   approved   program
strength figures.
Mr. ANDREWS: Are  you  familiar  with  any  plans  to  with-
draw  any  of  our  troops  from  there?
Army  Plans  No  Withdrawal  In  Vietnam
Gen.  TAYLOR:  No,  sir.   I  am  not  familiar  with  any  such
plans.
Mr.  ANDREWS:  In  your  1970  budget  you  ask  for  an  end
strength of  [censored].  Is that  correct?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  That  is correct,  sir.
Mr.  ANDREWS:  This  does  not  look  as  if  you  plan  with-
drawal.    It  looks  as  if  you  plan  an  increase.
Gen. TAYLOR:  [Censored].
Mr.   LIPSCOMB    (R.   CaL):   You  said   we   will   have   an
increase  to  reach  your  program  strength.   That  is  not  the
only  reason,  is  it?
Gen.  TAYLOR:  No  sir.
Mr.  UPSCOMB:  That  is  the  way  it  sounds.
Gen.  TAYLOR:  I  am  sorry  if   I  misled   you,   sir.   These
strengths  have  been   approved   as   required   to  support   the
strategic  concepts  developed  for   Vietnam.
—Testimony  taken  in  executive  session March  S  by  House
Appropriations   on  the  2d  Supplemental   for   1969   and   re-
leased  May  17.  Slightly   abridged  here.  Pps.   S60-1.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  2, 1969
50-40,  Oil  Subsidies  Or  Fight!
"Mr.  LONG  (D-La.): The  reason  we  have  the  oil  im-
port  control  program  is  not  to  try  to  get  oil  cheaper.
The  reason  we  have  the  program  is  that  we  feel   we
should  be  able  to  provide  for  our  requirements  of   an
item   that   is  absolutely  essential   to  this  nation.   The
Senator    [Proxmire]   talks  about   Canadian  oil   being
available.   How  does  the  Senator  know  whether  a  war
would   not   break   out  between  the   United  States  and
Canada?    Has  the   Senator  ever  heard  of   the   War  of
1812?"    —Debate  in  the Senate  (abr.),  Apr. 15, S  3742.
Fortas  Was  Unctuous  and  Disingenuous  In  Explaining   His  Resignation
The  Whole  Truth  About  Wolfson   and  Fortas  Has  Yet  To  Be  Told
It  is  "a  high  misdemeanor"   for  a  judge  to  engage  in  the
practice  of  law. The   troublesome  new  revelation  in  Fortas's
resignation  as  a  Supreme  Court  Justice  is  that  the  convicted
financier  Wolfson   "on   occasion  would  send  me  material  re-
lating  to  his  problems  .  .  .  and  on  several  occasions he men-
tioned  them  to  me."  This,   by  Fortas's   own  admission,  was
after   he   became   a   Justice.    What   did   Fortas   do   when   he
received  this  "material"  and  when  Wolfson   "mentioned"   his
"problems"?    Did   Fortas   send   the   materials  back,   did   he
stand  mute?   Did  he  refuse  to  enter  into  any  correspondence
or  discussion about  them  on  the  grounds  that  giving  Wolfson
legal  advice  of  any  kind  would  be  improper,  perhaps  unlaw-
ful?  The  question  is  not  answered by  the  Fortas memorandum
to  Chief  Justice  Warren.    Fortas  says  only  that  "I   have  not
interceded  or  taken  part  [italics added]  in  any  legal,  adminis-
trative  or   judicial  matter  affecting   Mr.   Wolfson   or  anyone
associated  with  him." But   Fortas   does   not   say  whether   on
occasion   he   gave   Wolfson    advice   on   how   to   handle   his
"problems."
A  Belated   Candor
What    makes   this   revelation   more   damaging   is   that   it
came   only,   like   Fortas's   resignation,   after   he   learned   that
Wolfson   had   talked   to  the   FBI   in  prison.   This   may  also
account   for   Fortas's   belated   revelation  that  the   $20,000   he
received   from   Wolfson's    foundation   was   not   intended   to
be-  a   single   payment   but   a   lifetime   retainer,   payable   after
Fortas's   death   to  his  wife.    It   is  impossible   to  believe  that
as  slick  an  operator  as  Wolfson   entered   into  any  such  rela-
tionship  in  the  belief  that  all  he  would  get  was  some  advice
for   his   Foundation's   rather   skimpy  philanthropic  activities.
The   Fortas   memorandum,   like  his  testimony  in  the  fight
against   his   nomination   as  Chief   Justice,  is   far   from   being
the   whole   truth.   A   stock   promoter    in   trouble   with    the
government   uses  his  "foundation"   to  put   a  Supreme  Court
Justice   secretly   on   his   payroll   for   life   at   $20,000   a  year,
and  the  recipient,  after  the  first  payment  comes  to  light,  sees
no  conflict  with  his  judicial  duties!  That  is  pretty  disingenu-
ous.    So  is  Fortas's   claim  that  he   took   this  retainer  because
he  thought  "the work  of  the  court  would  leave  me  adequate
time"   for   "the  foundation   assignments!"    This   treats   the
whole  affair  as  a  bit  of  moonlighting.
Fortas  admits  that  he   cancelled   the   retainership   in   June,
1966,   after  learning  that  the  SEC  had  sent  the  Wolfson  file
to   the   Justice   Department   for   criminal  prosecution.    It   is
curious  that   Fortas  does  not  claim  that   he   did   so   because
the   prospect   of  such  prosecution   might   embarrass   him  as  a
Supreme   Court  Justice.   He   says   his   letter   cited   only  "the
burden   of   court   work."    Even   then   the   arrangement   was
cancelled   "subject   to  completing   the  projects   for  the  year."
What  projects?   He   does   not  say.  Apparently   he   intended
to   serve   out   the   year   and   keep   the   first   $20,000   annual
payment.   But  in  December   he  decided   "because  of  the  de-
velopments  which  had  taken  place"  that  "the  services   which
I  had   performed   should   be  treated   as  a  contribution"  and
he   sent   back   the   $20,000.    What   "developments"?    The
indictments  of   Wolfson?
In  an  interview with  Benjamin  J.  Bradlee,   executive   editor
of  the  Washington   Post  (May 16),  right   after   his   resigna-
tion,   Fortas   said   of   his   returning   the   money   in   December
rather   than  June   "I   really  delayed   there  just   as  an   act  of
humanity!"    The   interview   was   extraordinary   in   its   brass
or  chutzpah.   To  believe  Fortas,  he  resigned  only  to  save  the
Court  from  "a  constitutional  confrontation."    He   told   Brad-
lee,  "Hell,  I  feel  there  wasn't  any  choice  for  a  man  of con-
science."    He   bowed   out  "not  because   the   Court   had  any
jurisdiction   or   any   power    in   the   matter,   but   because   the
Court   is  a  sacred   institution."   Worse  than  the  imprudence,
and   even  the  cupidity,   is  the  cant.
A  "Credible   Diplomacy"   Involves  More  Than  Megatonnage   And  Nuclear   "Chicken"
"I  would   remind  the  press  corps,  I  am  here  at   a  time
when  the  United  States  faces  a  threat,  not  of  the  magnitude
that   President   Kennedy  faced  at   the   time  of   the  Cuban
missile  crisis  ...    at that  time all of  the professional   experts
agreed  that  the  U.S. superiority  was  at  least   4  to  1  and
maybe  5  to   1,  over  the  Soviet  Union  in  terms  of  overall
nuclear  capability  ...      I  do  not  want  to  see  an  American
President   in  the   future,   in  the  event  of   any  crisis,  have
his  diplomatic  credibility  be  so  impaired  because  the  United
States  was  in  a  second-class  or  inferior  position.   We  saw
what  it  meant  to  the  Soviets when they were second.  I don't
want  that  position  to  be  the  United  States'  in  the  event  of
a  future  diplomatic  crisis."
—Nixon  at  press  conference,  April  21.
"I  am  very  much  troubled by  the  argument that  the  Safe-
guard   system,   by   protecting   the   deterrent   force,   would
strengthen  the  President's  resolve  in  a  crisis  ...     It  would
be   most   unwise   to   build   it   just   to   back   up   a   game  of
'chicken.'   The  strategic  superiority  enjoyed  by  the  United
States  is  often cited as  the  reason  for  the  Soviet withdrawal
during  the  Cuban  missile  crisis   and  used   to  support   this
argument.   I  believe  that  geography  and  disparity  of  inter-
ests   were   much   more   important   than   relative   nuclear
strengths.   It  was  easy   for  the  United  States   to  bring  its
conventional  forces  to  bear  on  that  situation  and  extremely
difficult  for  the  USSR  to  do  so.   Strategically,  it  was  much
more   important   to   the   United  States   than  to   the   Soviet
Union.   Recall  that  the  United  States  had  absolute  nuclear
superiority  at  the  time  of  the  1948  Berlin  crisis,  but  this
helped  very  little  in  resolving that crisis.   The  United States
also  had  vast  nuclear  superiority  at  the  time  of   the sup-
pression  of  the  Hungarians by  the  Soviet  Union,  and  yet  it
could  not  affect  the  outcome because  the  Soviet  forces  were
much  nearer  and  the  question  of   who  controlled  the   area
was  much  more vital  to  the  Soviet  leaders."
—Dr. Jerome  Wiesner  to Gore Subcommittee, May  14.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  June  2, 1969
The  Noblest  Kennedy  Memorial
We  salute  with respect  and sympathy  Senator Kenne-
dy's  letter asking that  Sirhan's life be  spared. It was the
noblest   memorial  to  Robert  Kennedy  and  to   President
Kennedy.    No  family   has   suffered   more  terribly  from
insanely  unbridled  political  passion  and  none  has  set  a
more  truly  Christian  example  than  in  the  case  of  this
poor  Palestinian Arab  demented  by  his  people's   suffer-
ing.   Our times  are  sick  of  blood  and  bloodshed.
A  High  Road  for  Nixon  and  A  Low  Road  for  Thieu
(Continued  from   Page One)
1965.    Johnson  deluded  many  people  into  believing  that   he
was  moving  toward   peace  at  the  very  moment  he  was com-
mitting  the  first  U.S. combat  troops  to  the  South.    The   only
remarkable  thing  about  the  Nixon  address is  that  at  one  point
he   seemed   to   be  pulling  his  own  leg.   When   Nixon   said
"repeating  the  old  formulas  and  the  tired  rhetoric  of  the  past
is  not  enough,"  he  seemed   to  be  setting  himself  up  for  the
cartoonists.    If   I   were   running  the   Secret  Service   I   would
find  out  who  wrote  that  and  take  him  down   to  the  White
House  cellar  for  interrogation under  the  bright  lights.   For  as
Senator  Gore  showed  in  a  devastating   analysis  on  the  Senate
floor  May  20,  the  speech  was  full   of  old  formulas  and  tired
rhetoric  picked  up  almost  verbatim  from   Johnson   and   Rusk.
Even  Nixon's  titillating hints about  free  elections and  a neutral
South   Vietnam  were  also  uttered,   as  Gore  found,   in   almost
the  same  words  by  Rusk  in  1966.  The  parallels with  Johnson
(see  box  on  p.   1  )  sound  as  if  Nixon  was  down  on  the  ranch.
If  this  weren't  politics, it  would  be  plagiarism.
Many  Hints But  Little  Substance
The   speech   is  so  tricky   it  has   everybody  confused   except
Henry  Kissinger.  "Proponents   leak  stories  that  the   President
is  sending  subtle  signals  to  the  Reds  that  he'd let  them   share
in  a  new  Saigon  government  as  part  of  a  peace  package,"  the
Wall   St.  ]onvnd   said  May  23.   "Opponents  warn  this  would
bring  the  'disguised  defeat'  Nixon   had  vowed  not  to   accept.
White  House  aides  insist  no  decision  has  been  made."   Never
have there  been  so many hints with so little substance.
You  can  read  in  Chalmers  Roberts  in  the  Washington  Post
(May   18)   that   silence  gives  consent   and   that   what  Nixon
didn't  say  May  14  really  means  he  is  ready  to  accept  even  an
interim  coalition government.  This  was  "spelled  out  by  persons
in  a  position  to  know,"  Roberts  wrote  ecstatically.  But  gravi-
tation  being  what  it  is,  what  goes  up  must  come  down,   and
he  added  a  but  —  "The U.S. cannot  accept  settlement  terms
which  would  turn  the  South  over  to  the  Communists  and  make
a  mockery  of   the  years  of   American  and   South   Vietnamese
the  South  for  15 years.
On  the  other  hand  you  may  read  in  David  Lawrence (May
21)   that  the  Nixon  Administration  has  "at  last"  decided  that
it  will  not  tolerate the  continuance of  heavy  attacks  and  is  not
ruling  out  drastic  reprisals which  "could  mean  the   resumption
at  any  moment  of  the  bombing  of  North  Vietnam  and  even  a
blockade  of  Haiphong  harbor."  Obviously   the  White  House
is   handing   out    different    lines   or   poop.    Richard   Wilson
(W-'tishingioii   Shu;  May   21)    reports   jubilantly  that   before
Nixon   went   on   TV   May   14  he   gave   an    extemporaneous
resume   to  his   top-level   officials.    They  not   only   applauded
but   "there  was  no  doubt  what   they  were  applauding."    The
main  emphasis  was  on  "not  quitting"   and  on  Nixon's "un-
pleasant  options"  if  Hanoi  does  not  accept  mutual  withdrawal.
These  include  "a  massive  fire-bomb  raid  to  destroy   Hanoi."
We'll  put  'em  back  in  the  Stone  Age  yet.   Senator  Hugh  Scott,
the  G.O.P. whip,  dropped  hints of  the  same  kind  after  Senator
Kennedy  —  in  the  wake  of  "Hamburger  Hill"  —   attacked
the  bloody   nonsense   of  charging  up  any  hill  a  well  dug-in
enemy  baits  for  U.S. attack.   •
In   the   blizzard   of  hints,  there   is  also   a  preview  of  what
Nixon  may  say to  Thieu  on  Midway  June  8.   It  is  hinted   that
if  one  reads  the fine print  closely one will  see that  Saigon  holds
a  secure  veto  over  the  international  supervisory  body  to  verify
withdrawals  "and for  any  other  purpose  agreed  upon  between
the   two   sides."    The   elections,   too,, would   be  held   under
"agreed  procedures"  and  agreed  means  the  agreement  of  the
Thieu   regime.   While  Nixon  takes  the  high  road,  Thieu  will
have  the  low,  and  when  domestic  opinion  gets  tired  of   seeing
the  Reds  reject  Nixon's  "generous"  offers,  the  iron  will  be  hot
and  the  Pentagon  hopes  it  can  strike  again.
bloodletting."    The  only  sure  non-mockery,  it  would   seem,  is
to  maintain  in  power  the  same  oligarchy  we  have  imposed  on
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend —  Send  A   Long  Stomped  Addressed   Envelope
The  Weekly  records   with  appreciation  the   service   during  the   past  year  as  editorial  assistant   of  Andrew  Moursund,  Jr.
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of  Torment  (Random  House)  regular  price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City                                          Zip                  State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a  sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  .
Street
City                                          Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                    s/a/eo
.  4420  29th  St.   N. W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
(Note  Corrected  Address)
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D. C.    P uUished   every   other   Monday   at   4420   29th   St.,   N.  W     Washington     D
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;*  $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
C.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED