I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969oct20.pdf

============================================================

An  End  To Searcb-and-Destroy? See P. 2
When  Even  The  Quakers  Despair
"I  am  absolutely  astonished  at  the  rigidity  of  this  Administration.  They  haven't  learned  a  single  lesson,  and  are  deter-
mined  to  prosecute  this  war  according to  the  Johnson  formula.   We  came  out  of  this  meeting  determined  to  issue  a  call
to  all  Americans to  support  the  October  and November actions  as  the  only  alternative  left.   We  are  dedicated  to  any  kind
of  nonviolent  action  to  indicate  to  the  Administration that  you  cannot  make  peace  by  making war."
—Branson  Clark,  executive  secretary  of  the  American  Friends  Service  Committee  after   a  90-minute  talk  by  a  Quaker
delegation  with  Dr.  Henry  Kissinger  at  the  White  House  Oct.  6, their  third  meeting  with  him  since  last  May.
L K  Stone's  Weekly
TV/—   n*.LJ;*L~J   B.ITI/^Z,/,,                       9/
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVII,  NO.  19
OCTOBER  20,   1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
No  Time  to  Pander  to  Racial  Bigotry
Before  and  after  slavery,  the  Southern  oligarchy  stayed  in
power  a  long  time  by  playing  poor  white  against  black.   We
hope  that  Nixon,  Agnew  and  Attorney  General  Mitchell  are
not  toying  with  the  idea  of  adopting  this  Southern  strategy
by  playing  the  white  middle  class  against  the  blacks  and  the
poor.   It  was  racialism  which  wrecked  the  promise  of  Popu-
lism  in  the  South.   The  GOP's  strategists  may  see  a  similar
hope  of  using  racial  prejudices to  prevent  the  rebirth  of  that
coalition   which   FDR   organized   as  a   successful   vehicle  of
social   reform.   The   first  hint   of   this   strategy   appeared   in
Nixon's   acceptance  speech,  when  he  appealed   to  "the  great
majority   of   Americans,  the   forgotten   Americans,  the   non-
shouters,  the  non-demonstrators."    Like  so  many  of  Nixon's
phrases,  this  was  an  echo  of  other   and  better  voices.   FDR
had   stirred   the   nation  with  "the   forgotten   man."    But  his
was an  appeal  to  compassion  for  the  underprivileged.   Nixon's
was  an  appeal  to  the  prejudices  of  those  who  had   made   it,
to  the  middle  class  and  white  collar  workers  now  fearful  of
those  pushing  up  from  below.
Encouraging  The  Know  Nothings
We   wonder  whether   this  line  is  being  orchestrated  now
by  the  Administration's  public  relations  men.   The   press  is
beginning  to  write  about  this  "forgotten  American"  in  a way
that  tends  not  just to  report  but  to  legitimize racial ill-feeling,
to  encourage  people  to  say things  aloud  they would  have  been
ashamed  to  say  a  few  years  ago.   An  example  was  provided
by  Newsweek's  special  issue  Oct.  6,  "The  Troubled  American:
A  Special  Report  on  the  White  Majority."  There  was  some-
thing  more  than  objective  reporting   in  the  slick  advertising
copy  prose   of   its   introduction.    "America   has   been   almost
obsessed,"  Newsweek   began,   "with   its   alienated   minorities
—the  incendiary  black  militant, and the welfare  mothers  .  .  .
Suddenly  the  focus  is  on  the  citizen  who  outnumbers,   outvotes
and   could,   if   he  chose   to,   outgun   the  fringe  rebel."    The
italics  are  ours.   "How  fed  up,"  Newsweek  continues,  "is  the
little  guy,  the  average  white  citizen  .  .  .?   Is  the  country
sliding   inexorably  toward   an  apocalyptic  spasm  —   perhaps
racial  or  class  warfare  .  .  . ? A  community  worker  in  a  Slavic
neighborhood   in  Milwaukee  is  quoted   as  saying,  "Everybody
wants  a  gun.    They  think   they've  heard   from  black  power,
wait  till  they  hear  from  white  power  —  the  little   slob,   GI
Student   Demonstrations?    Nixon's  Not   Even
Affected  By  His  Own  Official   Proclamations
The  men who  adopted  .  .  .  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence  were  a  varied  group  .  .  .  even  more  signifi-
cant  .  .  .  was  the  differences  in  their  ages:  three  were
under  30  ...      The  Committee  assigned  to  draft  the
Declaration  included  one  of   the  youngest  —  Thomas
Jefferson  .  .  .  Each  man  was  judged  not  on  how old
he   was   but  on   how  strongly   he   was   committed   to
liberty  .  .  .  The spirit  of  the signers  ...    is  needed in
our  nation  more  than  ever  before  .  .  .  Young and old,
we  are  all  Americans,  and  if   we  are  to  remain  free
we  must talk  to  each  other,  listen  to  each  other,  young
and  old  alike  .  .  .  NOW,  THEREFORE,  I,  Richard
Nixon,  President  of  the  United  States  of  America, do
hereby  designate  the  period  from   Sept.  28  to  Oct.  4,
1969,    as  National  Adult-Young Communication  Week.
—Signed  at  the  White  House Sept.  25  the  day   before
Nixon   told   the  press   that   "under   no  circumstances"
would  he  be  affected     by  student  peace  demonstrations.
Joe,   the   man  who   breaks   his  ass  and   makes  this   country
go  .  .  ."  One  is  provoked  to  ask,  "Go  where?"
Newsweek's  reporters  even  quote  one  man  who  said,   "We
should  have  a  Hitler  here  to  get  rid  of  the  troublemakers  the
way  they  did  with  the  JeWs  in  Germany"  —  not  a  remark
calculated   to   dissuade   blacks   from   buying  guns.    Carl   T.
Rowan   spoke   for   the   black  community,  and   we  hope   for
much  of   the  white,  when   in  his  column   about   Newsweek
(Washington   Star,  Oct.   8)   he  protested   "innuendoes   .  .  .
that  induce and  feed  paranoia  in  the  average  white man."   To
some  of   the   misunderstandings  dredged   up   by   Newsweek
about  favoritism  to  blacks,  Mr.  Rowan  replied  that  the  ratio
of  blacks  living  below  the  poverty  line  is  still  more  than  three
times that for  whites.
It  would  be  tragic  if  that  one  lunatic  remark  about  Hitler
led  blacks  to  think  this  was  typical  of  the  average  white  man.
Unfortunately  Newsweek's  presentation  encouraged  misunder-
standing.   Read  carefully  and  thoroughly  the  Newsweek  sur-
vey   leaves   one   with  quite  a   different   impression   from   its
opening  pages.   Under  different  instructions  the  same  rewrite
man,    summing  up  what  the  reporters   and  the  Gallup   poll
found,  might  have  written  quite  differently.  The  further  one
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Oct. 20,1969
How  The  House  Voted  The  Military  More  Than  $5 Billion  An  Hour  . . .
WRITING   THREE   DAYS   BEFORE,*   it   looked   as   if   Nixon
would   be  very  lonely   on   Moratorium   day.   Everybody  else
seems  to  be  on  the  bandwagon,  except  George  Meany,  Hubert
Humphrey  and the  Weatherman-SDS  ...     If  we  may be  par-
doned   an  exuberant  pun,   it   also   looks   as  if   Nixon's   first
reaction  to  an  event  he  said  he  would  under  no  circumstances
be  effected  by was  to  throw  the  students  a  Hershey  bar.  .  .  .
A   MORE   FUNDAMENTAL,  though  still  oddly  covert,  con-
cession   to  peace  pressure   seem  to  be  an  end  of  search-and-
destroy  missions,  apparently   the  main  reason   for   the   sharp
drop  in  casualties.   Up  to  now  we  have  been  told  by  Laird
and  the  military  that the  way to  keep  casualties  at  a minimum
was  to  keep  maximum  pressure   on  the  enemy.   The   signals
seem  to  have  changed  but  Laird  was  very  unwilling  to  admit
it  when  asked  about  it  at  press  conference  Oct.  9.   When  the
question  first  came  up  all  he  would   say  -was that  battlefield
tactics  had  changed  "because  of  the  change  by  the  Viet   Cong
and  the  North  Vietnamese."   Then  he  was  asked  whether  the
new   instructions  to   U.S.   troops   were   "not   to  go  out   and
engage  unless  they  are  first  engaged."   He  would  admit  only
that  new  instructions  had  been  issued  in  August  but  declined
to  go into  detail.  When  he  was asked  whether  the  new  orders
no  longer  called  for  "maximum  pressure"   on  the  enemy,  he
finally  replied  "That  is  true."   Another  correspondent   asked,
"Do  the  U.S.   troops  still  go  out  and  wheel?   Do  they  still
go  out  and  look  for  the  caches?   Do  they  avoid  contact?   This
is  what  I  think  we  ought  to  clarify."   To  this  Laird   would
only  reply,  "I  think  the  important thing  here  is  to  realize  that
the  South  Vietnamese  are  doing  more  of  this  than  at  any  time
in  the  past."   It  is  a  pity  no  correspondent  was  sharp  enough
to   ask  him   how   he   reconciled   his   answers   with   General
Wheeler's  statement   in  Saigon  only  a  few  days  before   that
the  orders  were  still  the  same  "maximum  pressure"   orders  as
in  July! Laird  is  still  the  Administration's   slipperiest  operator.
THE  MYSTERY  MAY  HAVE  BEEN  CLEARED  UP  next  day  by
Goldwater.   In  a  speech  at New  Orleans,  he  said  the  President
had   removed   from   contact   with   the  enemy  "95   percent  of
the  men  who  are  exposed   to  the  possibility  of  casualty  and
that's  why our  casualty  rates are dropping."
*We  had  to  go  to  press  early  in  order  to  speak  at  the
Harvard-MIT  undergraduate  kick-off   the   night   of   Oct.  14
and  next  day  in  Washington  at  the  Georgetown Law  School
all-day  Moratorium event.
Words  For  Demonstrators  To  Remember
"Our  investigation  has  shown  that  the  U.S.  failure
in   Vietnam   has   not   called   into   question   the   basic
premises  of   American  foreign  policy.   Policy  makers
have  not  forsaken  the  policy  of  intervention   —  they
merely  wish to  defend  U.S.  interests  at  a  more  accept-
able  level  of  cost  .  .  .  The  U.S.  will  continue  to  inter-
vene  in  other  countries,  using  military  and  economic
penetration   (which  we  prefer  to  call  'assistance')  and
clandestine  subversion  .  .  .  'At  the  Pentagon',   says  a
former   high   ranking  member  of   the   DOD   Systems
Analysis   Office,   '.  .  .  overall  strategic   objectives  are
never  challenged;  the  basic  premise  is interventionism,
and  the  topic  of  debate  is  the  most  effective   way  of
configuring  our  forces  to  serve  this  policy.'"
—From   a   report    by   11   college   youngsters    who
worked  at  the  Institute  for  Policy  Studies  in  Washing-
ton  on  a  "National   Security   Research  Project"   under
Leonard   Rodberg  and  Derek  Shearer.  In   a   summary
released   to   the   press   and   background   studies   to   be
published  in   book  form,   they   have  brilliantly    applied
the  methods  of  "Nader's  Raiders"   to  the  Pentagon  and
come  up  with  fresh  insight  and  material.
THOUGH  CONFRONTED  BY THE  LARGEST  military  spending
bill  in  history,  members  of  the  House   were  given  only  two
days  in  which  to  read  the  Armed  Services  Committee   hearings
on  it,  these  totalled   2,660  pages.    Most  members  barely  had
time  to  skim  through  the  Committee  report,   which  was  176
pages.  Mendel  Rivers, the  Committee  chairman and  the  Penta-
gon's  most  faithful  ally,  wanted  to  limit  debate  to  3 hours  but
settled  for  4.   Since  the  total  bill  was  $21.3  billion,  that  was
more  than  $5  billion  an  hour.   Never  did   so  many  vote  so
much  with  so  little  time  to  consider  what  they  were  doing.
The   "debate"   started   with   a   5-minute  rule   and   then    (on
motion  of  Stratton,  D.  N.Y.)    this  was  cut  to  45  seconds!
TOTAL  TIME  WAS  DIVIDED  EQUALLY  between   the   Demo-
cratic  majority  and  the  Republican  minority,  but  the  two-party
system  turned  itself  into  a  joke  for  the  military  establishment
since   both   parties  cooperated   in   steamrollering    the   House.
Every  amendment  to  cut  the  total  was  beaten  down.   Though
the  bill  involved  complex  problems  of  weaponry  and  foreign
policy,  Rivers  pushed   it  through  with  the  corn-pone   oratory
of  a  back  country  patent  medicine  salesman.   The  result  was
$1.2   billion   more   than   the   Senate   bill,   thanks   largely   to
"Admiral"  Rivers'  insistence  on  giving  the  Navy  $960  mil-
lion  more  than  the  Defense  Department  had  asked.
Church  Tells  Senate  Nixon's  "Plan"  Is  A  Formula  For  Staying  In  Vietnam  Indefinitely
"In recent  weeks  there  has  been  increasing  talk  of  chang-
ing   the  military  mix  in  Vietnam  by  replacing  American
ground  troops  with  Vietnamese,  while  retaining  American
supply  and  support  troops  in  their  combat  role.   This   is
not  a  formula  for  extricating  the  United  States  from  Viet-
nam;  it   is,   rather,   a  formula  for  keeping  up  to  300,000
American  troops  engaged  in  Vietnam indefinitely.  Its  pur-
pose  is not to get  out, but to stay  in.
"The  imperative  is  that  we  get  out.   This  does  not  mean,
of   course,  that   the   South   Vietnamese   Government  would
have  to  follow  suit,  or  that  it  would  be  helpless  in  the  face
of   its   enemies.    It   would  still  have  1,500,000  men  under
arms  against   135,000  Vietcong  and  90,000  North  Vietna-
mese  soldiers  now  in  South  Vietnam.  If  the  ARVN  could
be   inspired  to   defend  the   Saigon   government,   it   would
survive;  if  it  could  not  be  so  inspired,  then  the  government
does  not  deserve  to  survive.    We  have   done  enough.   We
have   fought   their   war   for   5   long   years   and   sacrificed
40,000 American lives.  It  is  enough."
—Church   (D.  Idaho)   in   the  Senate   Oct.  7,  sponsoring
two  resolutions.  S.  Res.  S70, with  Hatfield    (R.  Ore.),  calls
for   "a  more  rapid  withdrawal   of  American  troops"  and  a
commitment   "to   fully    disengage   from   South    Vietnam."
The   other  S.  Res.  268,  with  Senators   Hughes,   Cranston,
Eagleton,   Hatfield,   McCarthy,   McGovern,  Mondale,  Young
and  Yarborough,  calls  on  the  Saigon  government  within  60
daye   to  free  all  political  prisoners,  end  censorship,  restore
political  freedom,  and  present   a, plan  for   a  broadly   repre-
sentative   provisional   government.    If   these  conditions   are
not   fulfilled,     the   U.S.  would   terminate   all  military,  eco-
nomic and  political  assistance.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Oct.  20,1969
. . . State  Dept's  New Intelligence  Chief  A CIA Man Linked  To  Chiang
BUT  THIS TRAVESTY  OF  REPRESENTATIVE  government   can
be  the  beginning  of  serious  trouble  for  the military-industrial
complex.    For  the  first  time  in  years  a  half   dozen   weapons
systems  were  challenged  from  the   floor.   On  the  ABM  the
opposition   rolled   up  105  votes,  not  far  from  one-fourth   the
House  membership.    Five  members   of  Rivers'  committee  —
Leggett  (D.  Cat.),  Whalen   (R.  Ohio),  Nedzi   (D.  Mich.),
Pike  (D.   N.Y.)     and  Stafford   (R.   Vt.)   —   challenged  the
Chairman  and  defied  pressure   from  military  suppliers.   This
Fearless  Five  set  up  a  bi-partisan  study  group  and  made  inde-
pendent   recommendations,   giving   the  House   the  benefit  of
opposition   leadership  with  access  to  the  Committee's  classified
information.   The   liberal  Democratic   Study  Group   sent  out
elaborate  Fact  Sheets  which  provided  detailed  analyses  of  the
bill  and the  weapons.
ALL  THIS  ACTIVITY  MAY PAY OFF  when  the   authorization
must  be  turned   into  an  appropriation.    The   House   Appro-
priations  Committee  this  year  is  critical  of  the  military.  Laird
expressed   fear  some  weeks  ago  of  a  $5  billion  cut  by  House
Appropriations.    One   item   almost   certain  to   be  cut   is   the
extra  $960  million  for  the  Navy.   There  is now  the  beginnings
of   an   informed   and   aroused   opposition   in   the   House   to
spiralling  arms  costs.   It  would  be  good  if  study  groups   could
be  established  around   the  country  to  educate  concerned   citi-
zens  and  mobilize  counter-pressure  against  the military-indus-
trial  complex.   Rivers  threatened  Leggett  with  reprisals   from
his  California  district,  which  has  a  number  of  military  bases.
We  hope  his  constituents  will  support  him  against  Pentagon
blackmail.
IN  THE  WAKE  OF  THE  GREEN   BERET  case,  Asians  will
ask  a  question  Washington  has  been  too  insensitive  racially
to  consider.    What   if  the  victim  had   been   an  American,  a
white  man,  not  a  "gook",  would  the  case  have  been  quashed
and  the  widow  brushed   off  with  $6,000?   Another   question
should  concern  us  at  home.   Where  are  we  drifting  when  an
undercover  agency  is  not  only  allowed  to  arrange  murder  but
to  make  prosecution   impossible  by  refusing  to  allow  its  oper-
atives   to   honor   subpoenas    to   testify?.    What   if   the   next
murder  of  this  kind  is  at  home?   How  does  the  Administra-
tion  reconcile  its  stand  for  law  and  order  with  this  impunity
for  murder?
If  Only  We  Had Had  More  Carriers  .  .  .
"We  blundered  in  the  long  twilight  preceding   World
War  II,  and  found  ourselves  with  only  seven  carriers
all  told,  when  the  Japanese  struck  Pearl  Harbor.  .  .  .
"When  the  Korean  War  started  we  were  again  down
to  seven  active  modern   'attack  carriers'  of  the  Essex
class,  although  just  a  few  years  earlier  we  had   com-
pleted   building   24  of   them.   If   we   had  been   able   to
station  more  than  one  in  the  Western  Pacific,  after  the
severe   defense   cuts   by   Secretary   of   Defense   Louis
Johnson  and  the  Congress  in  1949,  we  might  have  de-
terred the  invasion of  South Korea....
"Reason  and  common   sense  tell  us,  now,  that  North
Viet   Nam   was   also  not   deterred   from   invading   the
South  by  what   they  saw  us  doing  to  the  readiness  of
our  armed  forces  in  the  early  sixties.   Was  it  just  a
coincidence  that  the  carrier   was  under  severe  fire  by
Defense   Secretary   McNamara   as   Ho  Chi  Minn   made
his  preparations?"
—By   Rep.  Craig  Hosmer   (R.  Col.)  in  Navy   maga-
zine   (Oct.)   reprinted   in   the   Con.  Record,  Sept.   29.
H852S.
IT  Is   APPALLING   THAT   AT   SUCH   A   MOMENT   the   Ad-
ministration   should  pick  a  veteran  CIA   man   as  director  of
the  State  Department's   Bureau  of  Intelligence  and   Research,
with  the  rank  of  Assistant  Secretary but  without  the  title,  so
he  is  not  subject  to  Senate confirmation.   Ray  S.  Cline  has  not
only  been  a  top  CIA  man  since  1949  but  has  close  ties  with
the  Chiang  Kai-shek  regime;  he  served  for  a  time  on  Taiwan
and  was  in  charge  of  U-2  flights  over  China;  he  is  a hard-line
cold  warrior and  we  hear  that  the  influential  Anna  Chennault
played   a  part   in  the  appointment.    Rogers   and  Richardson
have  been  talking  of   a  new  China  policy  yet  this  key  post
goes  to  a  man  whose  outlook  has  been  molded  by undercover
work  on  Taiwan  where  (Washington   Post,  Oct.  4)  he  became
a  close  friend  of  Chiang  Kai-shek's  son  and  expected  succes-
sor.   In  his  new  capacity Cline will  sit  on  the  powerful  Board
of  National   Estimates,  the  government's  highest intelligence
body  and  in  the  words  of  State's announcement he  will  be  the
Department's   "principal  source  of   long   range  forecasts  and
analysis  of  political,  economic  and  sociological trends through-
out  the  world."   Is  the  cloak-and-dagger  the  right  training for
a  sane view of world  politics ?
How  Saigon's  Landlord-Legislators  Are  Balking  Nixon  and  Thieu  on  Land  Reform
In  one  respect  South  Vietnam  is  no  dictatorship.   Thieu
may  suspend  newspapers,  persecute  the  Buddhists  and  jail
peaceniks.  But  when  he  tries  to  enact  land  reform,  he  runs
into  trouble.   In  the  joint  communique  after  he  met  with
Nixon  at  Midway  last  June  8,  Thieu  "laid  particular  stress
on  his  pursuit  of  a  vigorous  land  redistribution  program
that  would  give  land  to  those   who  work-it"  and  Nixon
offered  American  aid.
The  idea  was  to  undercut  the  Viet  Cong  appeal  to  the
landless  peasant.   Thieu's  plan  would  have  distributed  1.3
million   hectares   to   some   800,000   tenants.   The   program
would   have   cost   $400   million   and   Nixon   promised   $40
million.   The  landlords  were  to  be  paid  $80  million  in  cash,
the  rest  in  "rice  bonds",  linked  to  the  price  of  rice,  so  their
capital  would   not  be  destroyed  by  inflation.
But   the   Assembly,   which   is   dominated   by   landlords,
balked.   Thieu's   plan  did  not  even  get   out  of   committee.
The  bill  as  finally  passed  (see   John  E.  Woodruff   from    Sai-
gon  in  the  Baltimore  Sun   Aug.   26  and  Sept.  2,  the  only
correspondent  who  seems  to  be  covering  this  crucial  story)
would  reduce  the  number  of  landless  peasants  benefiting  to
480,000  or  290,000  (estimates  differ).   The  cash  compensa-
tion  to  the  landlords  was  raised  so  sharply  that   U.S.   of-
ficials  here  with  whom  we  discussed  it  fear  the   inflationary
impact.  The  bill  would  also  make  it  harder  for  the  peasant
to  get  the  land.
The  bill  is  now  before  the  Senate,  which  has  just  recon-
vened.    Thanks   to   the   peculiar   way   the   elections   were
rigged,  the  Senate  is  dominated  by  Catholics,  mostly   refu-
gees   from   the   North,  who  won  35  of   the   60  seats   with
about  one-eighth   of   the  total  votes  cast.   The   Catholics
are  close  to  Thieu.   Thieu  also  has   power  to  amend  any
bill,  and it  takes  a  majority  vote  of  both  houses  to  override
his  amendments.   A  long  battle  is  still  ahead.   In  Vietnam
as  in  the  Philippines  and  Thailand,  the  landed  oligarchies
of   "free  Asia"  we  spend  so   much  blood  and  treasure   to
defend   are   remarkably   unwilling   to   make   any   sacrifice
themselves.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   Oct.  20, 1969
Disaffected  Whites  Found  Unenthusiastic  About  Nixon  Or  Wallace
(Continued  from  Page  One)
reads,  the  more  it  begins  to  appear  that  the  American  middle
class  white  majority  is  nowhere  near  as  bad  as  the sensational
opening  portrait  would  lead, one  to  believe.
Still  Sympathetic  To  The  Blacks
Those  phrases  which  sounded   like  a  K.KK  speaker   in  a
clean  sheet  were  on  page   29.   But  by  page  45,   Newsweek's
account  of  its  special  Gallup  poll  leads  it  to  admit,  "For   all
his  resentment  at  black  activism,  the  Middle  American  still
has  a  basic  sympathy for  the  Negro's  aspirations  .  .  . nearly
7  out  of   10  agreed  that  at  least  some  of  the  demands  pre-
sented  by  Negro  leaders  are  justified."   That   is  quite  a  ma-
jority.   Even  on  law  and  order  the  poll's  results   differ   from
the  stereotypes.  "Only  10 percent  of  the  sampling  volunteered
crime  in  their  own  listing  of  the  nation's  problems."    Two-
thirds  didn't  think  police  had  enough  power  but  "a significant
minority  worried  about  a  police  state."   One  housewife  com-
mented  ironically, "Hitler  had  law and  order."   One furniture
store   manager   wanted   college   rioters   put   in   concentration
camps  but  59  percent  thought   well  of  young  people  and  54
percent  agreed   "that  young  people  were  not  unduly  critical
of   their   country   and   that   criticism   was   actually    needed.".
Obviously  the  bigot  and  the  bully  are  still  a  small,  if  noisy,
minority.    Indeed   by  page  48,   you  begin   to   find  that   the
American   middle   class   remains   remarkably   idealistic   and
liberal:
.  .  .  only  12  percent  thought  the  country  would  be  better
off   with  George  Wallace  .  .  .  there  was  little  enthusiasm
for  Mr.  Nixon  .  .  .  The  chief   complaint  is  not  so   much
the  level  of  taxation  but  rather  that  the  government  has
its  priorities  wrong  .  .  .  only  one  in  three  favored   a  tax
cut  .  .  .  the  sampling   favored    added   spending  for  such
programs  as  job  training,  pollution  control,  medicare,  slum
housing,  and  crime   control   ...       a   good   many   thought
money  was  being  wasted  in  foreign  aid  and  defense  spend-
ing  —  and  even  in  the   afterglow   of   the   moon  landing,
fully  56  percent  thought  the  government  should  spend  less
on  space   [and   they  were  overwhelmingly  fed  up  with  the
war].
Neither  violence,  racism  nor  alienation  are  peculiar  to  the
It  Won't  Be  Long  Now
Here  are  the  official  Pentagon  figures  for  the   number
of  troops  in  Vietnam  for  the  last  6  weeks:
Aug   31                                            509,800
Sept.  4                                              509,600
Sept.  11                                       508,000
Sept.  18                                           510,200
Sept.  25                                        511,500
Oct.  2                                                509,600
Net  withdrawal   in  six  weeks          200
At  this  rate  we  would   withdraw   1,732   men  every  12
months  and  be  out  of  Vietnam  in  294  years.
*         *         *
P.S.     Lest   our  little   joke   seems   too   far   out,   the
Townsend  Hoopes  article  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly   for
October  serves  as  a  reminder  that  we  had  510,000  men
in  Vietnam  at  the  end  of  February,  1968,   when  the  Tet
offensive    led  to   Johnson's  agonizing  shift   of   policy.
That  is  a  net  change  of  only  400  in  19  months!   The
Hoopes  revelations  on how Johnson's  mind  was  changed
are  must  reading.  The greatest  single  contribution  was
by  Dean  Acheson,  on  whom  Johnson  relied  as  a  hawk
and  veteran  cold   warrior.   "With   all  due  respect,  Mr.
President,"  he  told  Johnson,  "the   Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff
don't  know   what  they're  talking  about."   There  is  no
reason  to  think  they  have  changed.
United  States;  they  are  everywhere  on  the  planetary  landscape.
Biafra  shows  what  blacks  can  do  to  blacks  and  Ulster  what
whites  can  do  to  whites.    The   struggle   in  Ulster   for  civil
rights  and  equal  opportunity   is  far   more  bloody  than  ours,
though  the  bigoted  majority  and  the  underprivileged  minority
look  exactly alike  and  speak  in  the  same  brogue.   The   News-
week  survey,  for  all  its  GOP-style  preliminary  preconceptions,
shows  that  the  white  American  middle  class  is  still  ready  for
humane   and   progressive   leadership.     History   should    have
taught  us  by  now  that  in  every  people  there  is  a  potential  for
evil  as  for  good.   Without  economic  justice  and  racial  recon-
ciliation,  our  country has  no  future.   Nothing  could  be  worse
for  America  than  a  leadership  which  panders  to  bigotry  and
smugness,  as the  "forgotten   American"  line  does.
We'll  Be  Clod  to  Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
FOR
For  the  enclosed
A Time of  Tormen
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate  if
Please  renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.
4420  29th  St.
STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
16.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
t  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
.  .  .     Zip               State
gift   announcement  wished  O
enter)  a  sub  for  the   enclosed   IS:
Zip                State  .
F.  Stone's  Weekly                  10/20/69
N. W-,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
IE    Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Si-Weekly
4420  29rii   St.,   N.W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.   Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,   N.W.,   Washington.   D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  »5  in  the  U.S.:    $6  in  Canada;
110  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  120 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED