I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969jul14.pdf

============================================================

Why  Fulbright  Won  on  "National  Commitments",  P.  2
Here  Men  First  Set  Foot  Outside  The  Earth  On  Their
Way  To  The  Far  Stars.   They  Speak  of  Peace  But  Where-
ever  They  Go  They  Bring  War. The  Rockets  On  Which
They   Arrived  Were  Developed   To  Carry  Instant   Death
Plaque  For  The  Moon  Landing
And   Can   Within   A   Few   Minutes   Turn   Their   Green
Planet   Into   Another   Lifeless    Moon.    Their   Destructive
Ingenuity  Knows  No  Limits  And  Their  Wanton  Pollution
No   Restraint.    Let   The   Rest   Of   The   Universe   Beware.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
7V7/YI4I   T^'Hnl'trha/1    Ki—\A/aohlAi                                  ^^
Now  Published Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVII,  NO.  14
JULY  14,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
Why   SALT  Spells  Fraud
The  folly  of  competition  in  arms  was  recognized  by  phil-
osophers  in  the  Eighteenth  Century and  statesmen  in  the Nine-
teenth.   The   first   disarmament  conference   was  held   at   the
Hague  in  1899. Except  for  the  period  of  the two World  Wars,
there  has  hardly  been  a  year  in  which  disarmament  negotia-
tions  of  some  kind  have  not  been  going  on.  These  have  be-
come  a  ritual,  and  almost  a  comedy,  punctuating  the  pauses
and  fresh  starts  of  the  arms  race.  The  military  machines  and
their  allies  have  learned  to  turn  them  into  an  elaborate  kind
of  game,  designed  to  befuddle  public  opinion  into  believing
that  something  was  being  done  about  the  ever  growing  ex-
pense  and  danger.
A  Cover  For  The  Arms  Race
Not  only  the  State  Department  but  the  Pentagon   and  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  have  developed  sub-divisions  skilled   in
"arms  control,"  that  is,  talk  about  arms  control.  This  games-
manship  has  been  perfected  to  the  point  where  it  may actually
be  used  to  cover  up  a  new  spiral  in  the  arms  race,  or  indeed
even  to  sell  the  public  on  the  need   for   new  weapons   and
higher  expenditures.  This  is  the  only  safe,  if  cynical,  perspec-
tive  from  which  to  view  the  Nixon  Administration's  prepara-
tions  for  new  talks  on  strategic  weapons.  The  men  named  to
direct  these  talks  and  the  negotiating  positions  being  mapped
out  in  advance  are  not  calculated  to  restrain   or  reduce   the
arms  race  but  to  move  it  forward  into  the  higher  and  more
dangerous   levels   represented   by  the   ABM  and  the   MIRV.
The  SALT—Strategic   Arms  Limitation  Talks—will   prove  a
fraud.
Some  apparent  motion  toward  arms  talks  was  essential  to
the  Nixon  Administration  on  the eve of  the  Senate battle  over
ABM.   This  was  a  political   necessity   to   convince  wavering
Senators  that  the  ABM  is  just  a  bargaining   card  to  use  in
negotiations,   and  to  keep  alive  the  hope  that  this  dangerous
and  expensive  new  development  will  be  made  unnecessary by
joint   agreement.   But  if  you  look   closely   you  will  see  that
nowhere  has  .the Nixon  Administration  explicitly said  it  would
forego   an  ABM  if  the  Russians  did  likewise.  On  the con-
trary,   you  will   see  that   the   Nixon   Administration  is   not
prepared  to  negotiate  whether  there  will  be an  ABM but  only
how  much  of one.
This was implicit  in  a hint  dropped  by the  President  March
14 in  the original  press conference announcing  the ABM when
he  was  asked   whether  he   would   "be   willing   to   consider
abandoning   the   ABM   program   altogether    if   the   Soviets
showed   a  similar  willingness   or,  indeed,  if   they  showed   a
readiness  to  place  limitations  on  offensive  weapons?"  Nixon
replied  that  "the arms  talks  that  at  least  preliminarily  have
Where  There  Is  No  Vision
Indecisive,  weak  and  tricky,  with  neither  the  states-
man's  vision  nor  the  politician's   finesse—this   is  how
Nixon  shapes   up.   Like  Johnson,  he  talks  of   fighting
inflation  but  is  unwilling  to  gain  revenue  by  stopping
up   tax   loopholes   or   by  imposing  the   excess   profits
taxes  usual  in  wartime; he  fights  only  to  continue  the
regressive   10  percent  surtax   which  falls  heaviest  on
the  lower  income  brackets.  In  the  Knowles  affair,  he
showed  himself  a  weakling;  a  storm  could  have  been
avoided  if   he  had  said  "no" sooner.   Unlike  Johnson,
Nixon  does  not  seem   to  grasp  at  all  the  gravity  of
the  racial  crisis.    On  voting  rights   and  school  guide-
lines,  his  equivocations  encourage  Southern  resistance
and intensify  black disillusion.   That  terrible  separation
into   two   nations   of   which   the   Kerner  commission
warned   has   been   deepened   by   Nixon's   transparent
"Southern  strategy".   It  is  a tragedy  at  a  time like this
to  have  a  nullity  in  the  White  House.
been  discussed,  do  not  involve  limitation  or  reduction.  [Italics
added].  They   involve   only  freezing  where  we  are." Then
Nixon  went  on  to  say that  he  "would  imagine  that  the  Soviet
Union  would  be just  as reluctant  as we would  be to  leave their
country  naked  against  a  potential  Chinese  Communist  threat"
and   added,   "So  the   abandoning  of  the  entire  system,  par-
ticularly  as the  Chinese  threat  is  there,  I  think  neither  country
would  look  upon  with  much  favor."  Moscow  must  have  been
startled  to  hear  Nixon   speaking  for  it.
The  full  meaning  of  Nixon's  remarks  begins  to  be  spelled
out  by  a  pamphlet   "Safeguard:   What   Are  The   True   An-
swers?"   sent  out  recently  to  editors  all  over  the  country  by
Nixon's  Director  of  Communications  Herbert  G.  Klein.  The
answer to  the question,  "How  would  Safeguard  affect  prospects
for  arms  control?",  after  spelling out  various  possibilities, con-
cludes  by  saying—
However,   those   parts   of   the   Safeguard   program  de-
signed  for  defense  against   China,  small  countries  with  a
strategic  delivery  capability  or  accidental  or unauthorized
attacks   from  any  source   would  not  be  affected   by  arms
control  agreements  with  the  Soviet  Union,  nor  do  we  ex-
pect  the  Soviet  Union  to  forego  deployments  designed  for
similar   purposes.
This  means  the  only  part  of  the  Safeguard  system  open  in
negotiation   is  that  small  part  designed   specifically  to  protect
our  Minuteman  bases.  This  leaves  out  the  major  part  of  the
system,  the  Spartans  and  the  computer-radars  which  go  with
them  and  the  Sprints  to  protect  the  computer-radars.
(Continued  on Page  Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  14,1969
(Continued  from  Page  One)
Indeed  from  the  rest  of  the  reply  to  this  question  it  is  not
even  clear  just  how  much  of  our  Minuteman  defenses  would
be  negotiable.   It  says  "If   the   Soviet   Union  slows  down  or
stops  its  deployment  of  the  large  payload  SS-9 missile or  if  the
likelihood   that   these  missiles   will   be  armed  with   accurate
multiple  warheads  is  materially  reduced,  we  can  readily  limit
that  part  of  the  Safeguard  program  which  is  designed  to  de-
fend  our  land-based  missiles."  The  italics  are  ours,  to  empha-
size  what  is  here  offered  is  limitation  of  planned  deployment
and  not  reduction.
A  Slick  One-Sided  Bargain
But  what  if  the  development  of  the  Soviet  SS-9  is  an answer
to  our  MIRV,  as  it  seems  to  be?  This  does  not  say that  we
would  give  up  our  MIRV  if  they  did  not  develop  theirs.  It
says  we  would  limit  our  ABM  missiles  if  they  slow  down  or
stop  the  deployment  of  the  SS-9  and  "materially  reduce"   the
"likelihood"—whatever    these  terms  mean—that  they  will  be
armed  with  "accurate  multiple  warheads."   So  we  are  propos-
ing  to  bargain  our  ABMs  against  their  MRVs  instead  of  nego-
tiating  ABMs  against  ABMs  and  MIRVs  against  MIRVs  to
put   a   stop   to   both   monstrous   developments.     (MRVs   are
multiple   warheads;   MIRVs   are  multiple  and   independently
targeted).
This   slick   stance   becomes   clearer   in   the   next   sentence,
"Even  more  favorable  reductions   in  the  Soviet   offensive  and
defensive-threat  could  be  matched  by further  restraints  in  our
ABM  deployment."   There is no  indication  of  any  readiness  to
put  our  own  MRVs  and  MIRVs  on  the  table,  nor  even  to  go
beyond  "further   restraints"   in  our  ABM  deployment.
The   Administration's  negotiating   position   on  MRVs  and
MIRVs  is  less  clear.  But  there  are  clues  in  an  article  Harold
Brown,  former  Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  wrote  in  Foreign
Affairs    last  April.  Brown  is  one  of  six  men  picked   for   the
negotiating   team  in  the  SALT  talks.   Brown  is  regarded  as
the  most  dovish  of  the  six,  and  Brown  is  not  much  of  a  dove
as  we  shall  see.  The  others  are  Major  Gen.  Royal  B.  Allison,
former  arms  control   specialist   for  the  Joint  Chiefs  of   Staff;
Paul  H.  Nitze,   a  Dean   Acheson  hard-liner  from  way  back,
Deputy   Secretary  of  Defense   under   Johnson,   more  recently
picked  by  the  new  Pentagon   team  as  "consultant"  to  prepare
for  the  new  talks;  Llewellyn  Thompson,   former  Ambassador
to  Moscow;  and  two  standard  model  State  Department  types
who  were  once  assistants  to  John   Foster   Dulles—Gerard   C.
Latest  Test  Of  Our Tiger-Ish   Allies
Col.   Lien   [South   Vietnamese   Commander   in.  the
area   which  includes  Benhet]   said   North  Vietnamese
had  taken  the  "bait"  and  were  in  the  process  of  being
"smashed"  ...     In  Saigon  today,  however,  South  Viet-
namese  military spokesmen  reported  South  Vietnamese
forces  sweeping  the  area   around  Benhet  reported  no
contacts   with  the   enemy  in  several   days.   Asked  to
explain   the   apparent  discrepancy,  one   South   Viet-
namese  colonel  said,  "That's   Vietnam."  Col.  Lien,  he
added,  "is  a  real  tiger."
—J.  P.  Sterba  from  Saigon  New  York  Times  July  2.
The  siege   of   Benhet   was   not   lifted   by  American
airpower,   American  artillery  or   the   belated  appear-
ance  of  the  regular South  Vietnamese  infantry.  It  was
lifted   by  the  North  Vietnamese   troops  that   had  be-
sieged  the  outpost  in  the  first  place  .  .  .  The  South
Vietnamese   despite   the   massive   U.S.   logistical    and •
firepower support   behaved  miserably  .  .  .  Col.  Lien
claimed  at  least  3600  enemy  troops  died  in  his  "trap".
Most  allied intelligence  estimates  place the  total  enemy
troops   at   about  3500.
—Bentley  Orrick  from  Saigon  Baltimore  Sun,  July  S.
Smith,   now   head   of   the   Arms   Control   and   Disarmament
Agency   and   Philip   J.   Farley,   deputy  assistant   Secretary  of
State  for  political-military affairs.
At  first  glance  Brown's  article seems  to  be  in  favor  of  arms
control  but  reading  it  closely  one  can  see  that  it  is  for  arms
control  after   and  not  before  the  construction  of  anti-ballistic
missiles  and  trie  deployment  of  multiple  warheads  on  each
side.   If  this is to  be the  position of  the  Nixon  Administration,
then  the  effect  of  new  arms  talks—even  if  successful—would
be to  initiate rather  than  prevent  a new  spiral  in  the  arms race.
Insofar  as  ABM  is  concerned,  Brown  says  a  limit  of   100
would  be  enough  protection  against  "small  accidental  strikes"
but  1,000  would  be  "much  more  satisfactory . .  . against third
country   attacks."   He   admits   that   1,000   "might   begin   to
threaten   the  stability  of   the  U.S.-Soviet   deterrence,   since  it
might  give  the  attacker  the  capacity  to  eliminate  most  of  the
retaliatory  weapons  that  would  survive  a  first  strike  employing
improved   MIRV  technology."   Brown  then   suggests  a  limit
of  several  hundred  launchers  for  city  defense  "as  opposed   to
missile  site  defense"  for  which  he  gives  no  concrete  number.
So  this  envisages  city  defense  as  well  as  missile  site  ABMs,
Why  the  Senate  Passed  70-16  Fulbright's  "National  Commitments"  Resolution
"This  Resolution  .  .  .  signals  an  end  to  Congressional
acquiescence   to   unauthorized  commitments  of   American
men   and   financial   resources   abroad."    —Cook   (R.Ky.)
"In  one  of  the  hearings  last  year  or  the  year  before,  the
then  Secretary  of  State   Rusk  made  the  argument,  and  it
was  very  offensive  to  me  ...      that,  having  supported the
foreign  aid  bill,  and  having  given  a  great  deal  of  aid  to
South  Vietnam,  we  had  created   a   kind  of  Constitutional
climate  that  gave  authority  to  our Government, to  what we
were  doing.   That  really  turned  me  on.   If  I  had  dreamed
that,  by  supporting  foreign  aid,  I  was  giving  him  or  any
other  administration  authority  to   intervene  with  500,000
men,  I  would  have  cut  my  throat."    —Fulbright   (D.Ark)
"If  the  Executive  can  independently  decide  when  to  de-
ploy   America's  Armed   Forces,  it  ...      has  the final say
in  determining how  a  large  proportion of  our  resources  will
be   expended.   But   resource   allocation   is   Congress'   most
important   function  .  .   .   Without  this   power,   Congress
would   be   nothing   more  than   an   ornament,  whose  only
purpose  would  be  to  give  automatic  approval  to  the  deci-
sions  of  an  all  powerful  Executive."    —Tydings,    (D.Md.)
"Secretary  .  .  .  Rusk   made  the  now-famous  statement
that—'No   would-be   aggressor    should   suppose   that   the
absence  of  a  defense  treaty,  Congressional  declaration,  or
U.S.   military   presence   grants   immunity   to    aggression.'
.  .  .  this  statement  comes  perilously  close  to  casting  us
in  the  role  of   policeman  of   the   world—a  role   which   we
have   neither   the   manpower  nor   the   materiel   resources
to  fulfill."     —Stennis  (D.Miss.)
"With   the   exception  of   the   Nuclear  Nonproliferation
Treaty,  we are called  upon  to  ratify  trivia . . .  With  respect
to  things  that  matter  and  which  affect  the  destiny  of  the
Nation,  we  frequently  leave  them  up  to  unilateral execu-
tive  decision."    —Eagleton   (D.Mo.)
"The  Roman  Caesars  did  not  spring  full  blown  from  the
head   of   Zeus.    Subtly   and   insidiously,  they   stole   their
powers  away  from  an  unsuspecting Senate.  .  .  .  Senators
of  the  United  States  may  still  enjoy  their  ancient  freedom
to  debate  and  legislate,  but  through  our  own  neglect,  we
have  come  to  deal  increasingly  more  with  the  form  than
with  the  substance   of  power.     —Church   (D.Idaho)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  July  H, 1969
though  not  as  many  as  1,000  altogether.  An  agreement   on
these  lines  would  thus  open  and  vastly  enlarge  this  new ABM
sector  of  the  arms  race.
Arms  Control  a  la  Rube  Goldberg
Insofar  as  MIRV  is  concerned,  Brown  at  first  seems  to  be
against  its  deployment.   "Clearly,"  he  writes,  "an   agreement
to  ban  the  deployment  of  MIRVs  would  be  desirable  to  fore-
stall  erosion  of  the  capability  to  deter."  But  this  soon   begins
to blur.  For  Brown  goes  on  to  say, "But the  agreement  should
allow  multiple  re-entry  vehicles  that  are  not  capable  of  being
individually guided."  The  italics  are Brown's.  But then  Brown
admits  by  implication  that  once  we  move  into  multiple war-
heads  it  is  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  tell  by  aerial  surveil-
lance how  many  there  are  atop  each  missile  and  whether  they
are  independently  guided  or  not.  As  Brown  says,  "Unfortu-
nately  a  check  on  deployment   of   different   types  of   payload
clearly  requires  on-site  inspection   of  a  very  obtrusive  kind."
A  "very  obtrusive  kind"  is presumably  the  kind  we,  as well  as
the  Russians,  would  object  to.
The  one  clear   answer  to  this  problem   is  to  negotiate   an
agreement   banning   both   MRVs  and  MIRVs  while  there   is
still  time  to  prevent  this  new  and  destabilizing   development.
Brown  suggests  instead  a murky  compromise.   "It  is possible,"
he  suggests,  "that  even  without  on-site  inspection  we  can  tell
enough   about   each  other's   missiles  to  obtain  reasonable  as-
surance."  He  says,  "This  is so  because  the  probable  number of
warheads  per  missile  is  proportionate   to  the  payload  of   the
missile,  and  payload,  in  turn,  is  directly  related  to  the  gross
volume,  which  we  may be  able  to  determine  unilaterally," i.e.
by  aerial   reconnaissance.*
"Thus,"  Brown  goes on,  "a  ceiling  on  numbers  and  sizes of
missiles  could  also  limit  MIRVs  to  a  number  less  than  that
needed   for   an   effective   first   strike,  and  yet  permit   enough
re-entry  vehicles to  penetrate  missile defenses—as   required  for
deterrence."   [Italics  added].   If  we  need  multiple   warheads
to  overcome  ABM,  why  not  negotiate  an  agreement  to  deploy
neither?
Brown's   further   suggestions   admit  that   once   ABMs  and
MRVs   are  allowed,   policing   such   an   agreement   would   be
difficult.   He   says  we  would  not  only  need   an  agreement   to
limit  the  number  of  ABMs  and  missiles  but  "to  ban  complete-
ly  any  mobile  land-based  missiles,  since  they -would  make  it
easier  to  conceal  illicit  increases  in  a  missile  force."   Once  the
horse  was  stolen,  any  number  of  locks  would  be  needed  for
*  For   a   startling   revelation  of   how   much  we   can   now
learn  by  aerial  reconnaissance  see  Jeremy  J.  Stone's  chap-
ter,  "Can  The  Communists  Deceive  Us?" in  the  symposium
on the  ABM edited by  Abram  Chayes and Jerome B.  Weisner.
No  Sooner  Said  Than  Done
"Taken  together,  the  military-industrial  team,  which
protects  our  national  interest  against  foreign   enemies,
constitutes   at  the  same  time  a  vital  national   resource
that  contributes  on an ever-increasing  scale  to  solutions
for   many  of  our  domestic   ills."
—UJS.   Air   Force  Association   annual   policy  state-
ment,  Air   Force  and  Space  Digest,  May,  1969.
"Secretary   of   Defense  Melvin  R.  Laird  has  named
a  ranking  general  in  Vietnam  to  become  director  of
the  Pentagon's  Civil  Disturbance  Planning  and Opera-
tions  Office.   He  is  Lt.  Gen. Richard  G.  Stilwell,  com-
mander   of   the   24th   Corps   in   Vietnam.    The   Civil
Disturbance   Center  operates   as  a  military  command
post   for   directing   and  overseeing   the   movement  of
troops  around  the  country  during  city  riots."
—A.  P.  in  the  Washington   Star,  May  29.
"The   war  against   organized   crime  now  is   getting
help   from   the   Pentagon.    Charles   H.   Rogovin,  head
of   the   Justice   Department's   law  enforcement  assist-
ance   administration,   said   two   intelligence   gathering
divisions  of  the  Defense  Dept.  are  providing  technical
assistance  for  an  'automated  organized   crime  intelli-
gence  system.'"
—A.  P.  Same   Paper,   Same  Day.
the  stable  door.  "A  subsequent  agreement,  Brown  continues,
"should  then  be  worked out  to  limit  the  size  of  missiles and
thus  prevent  the  unlimited  growth  [my  italics—IPS]  of  the
MIRV  threat  through  development  of  larger  and  larger  mis-
siles."  But  even  this  is  not  enough  because  as  Brown writes—
All  deterrence  systems  tend  to  obsolesce.   Thus,  the  in-
creasing  accuracy  and  miniaturization of  missile  warheads
reduce  the  survivability of  missiles  in  silos; improved anti-
submarine  warfare  techniques  have  the  same  effect  upon
Polaris;   improved   FOBS  or  submarine-launched  missiles
lessen  the  effectiveness  of  the  bomber;  and  new  ABM  or
anti-aircraft   techniques   might   seriously   affect   weapons
penetration—all   without  an  increase   in   the   quantity   of
weapons.
This  opens  the  prospect  of  an  endless  arms  race  in  quality
if  not  quantity  once  ABM  and  MIRV  are  accepted.  To  meet
the  menace  of  perpetual   improvement,  Brown  adds   another
rickety  device  to  his  Rube  Golbergian   arms  control  structure.
"In   order  to  attain  a  lasting  treaty,"   he  writes,  "we  might
need  an  understanding  on  exactly what  sort  of  improvements
would  or  would  not  be  allowed."  This  in  turn  would  "also
require  some  form  of  relatively  simple  on-site  inspection   to
ensure  compliance."  The  inspectors  would  have  no  easy  time
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Why  Bother  the  Mafia,  When  You  Can  Chase  Student   Subversives   Instead?
"Undercover   police  investigations   in  Illinois  are  at   an
all-time   high.    In   the   Chicago   area   alone,   more   than
1,000  men  from  the  FBI  and  various  other  federal,  state,
county,   and   city   agencies   are   working   on   super-secret
assignment.   'Our growing  concern  about  subversives  and
militants,  with  their  talk  of  armed  revolution,  has  brought
us  a  temporary shift  in  emphasis away  from  the organized
crime   problem,  said  Illinois  State   Police  Supt.  James  T.
McGuire.   'I've never  seen  anything  like  the  intensity   of
the  current  investigations  in  all  my  years  in  law  enforce-
ment,' McGuire said.
"The  shift  in  emphasis  was   evidenced  this   week  when
dozens  of   undercover  agents   'monitored'  the   seventh   an-
nual  convention  here  of  the  leftist   Students  for  a  Demo-
cratic   Society.   Deputy   Chicago   Police   Supt.   John Mul-
chrone,   the   department's   resident   expert   in   intelligence
matters,  said  he  had 'upwards of  500  men' doing undercover
work.  The new shift against  subversives also  was evidenced
in  an  April  speech  by  Mulchrone's  top  aide,  Capt. Thomas
J.  Lyons,  at  a  meeting  of  600  police  intelligence  experts
at  Palm  Springs, Cal.  Lyons  described  the  telephone  inter-
change  of  information between  police  departments  when  a
suspected  subversive  travels  .  .  .  Undercover  agents   use
a   variety   of  investigative  techniques.   These   include   dis-^
guises,   wiretapping,  infiltration   and  around-the-clock  sur-
veillance.   Frequently  they   use   'dummy'  businesses  oper-
ating   from   rented  storefronts,   and  assign   policemen  as
drivers  of  trucks  from  non-existent  television  repair  com-
panies   or   pizza   parlors.    Mulchrone   said   he   often   hires
civilian   men  and  women   as   informers  and   investigators.
'We  get  people  who've  become  disillusioned  .  .  .
—Edmund  J.  Rooney  in  the  Chicago Daily News, June  21.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, July  14,1969
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
of   it.  For  Brown  would  design  the  treaty  limits  "to  control
the  first  strike  threat,"  but  he  says  they  "should   not  inhibit
the   countermeasures   which  must   be  taken   against  gradual
improvements  in  the  other  side's  forces  or  against  illicit  im-
provements."   Finally   Brown   admits  that   "the   problem   is
complicated  by  the  fine  line  between  first-strike  and  second-
strike  capabilities."  No   wonder   we  are  already  being   told
cheerfully  in  backgrounders  from  the  Pentagon  that  the  nego-
tiations  might   take  years!    How   achieve  stability  once  you
embark—as  Brown  would  have  us  embark—on  two  such  de-
stabilizing  developments  as  ABM  and  MIRV?
Freezing  U.S.   Superiority
There  is  a  hidden  ploy  in  the  recesses  of  this   negotiating
position.  An  agreement  to  limit  the  number  and  size  of  mis-
siles  would   freeze  U.S.   superiority.    We   are  ahead   of   the
Russians  in  miniaturization and  accuracy  of  warheads  as  well
as  in  the  development   of  MRV  and  MIRV.  The  MRVs  in
clusters  of  three  are  already  deployed  in  Polaris  A3  missiles,
possibly  even  in  Minuteman  III,  though  the  latter  is  not  cer-
tain.  We  have  already  budgeted   $2  billion   for  the   coming
fiscal  year   to   deploy   Poseidon   and   Minuteman   III,   both
MIRVed.  The  Russians  have  only  tested  cluster  MRVs.  We
began  to  deploy  MRVs  in  Polaris  as  far  back  as  1966.    Thus
the  Russians,  in  accepting  an  agreement  of  this  kind,  would
have  to  settle  for  a  position  of  inferiority  in  which  the  U.S.
might  achieve  a  first  strike  capacity  without  violating  any  of
the  various  agreements  set  forth  by  Brown.  After  all  we  are
putting  10  or  more  warheads  in  each  Polaris  submarine  with
Poseidon  and  3  or  more  in  each  Minuteman  without  any  sig-
nificant  increase  in  the  size  of  the  missile  and  no  increase  in
their  numbers.  These MIRVs  -will  soon  increase  our  capacity to
the  point  where  the  Soviets  would  have  reason  to  fear  a  first
strike.
Such  corkscrew  negotiating  positions,  almost  certain  to  en-
sure  failure  and  thus  excuse  a  further  surge  in  the  arms  race,
suits  the  solidly  Goldwaterite  chain  of  command  which  will
oversee  the  talks  for  the  Pentagon.  The  new  Deputy Secretary
of   Defense  for   Policy  Planning  and   Arms  Control,   is   Dr.
Yuan-li   Wu,   originally  a  refugee   from   Communist  China,
more  recently  a  scholar  at  that  cold  war  citadel,  the  Hoover
Institute  of  War  and  Revolution  at  Stanford.  Goldwater  wel-
comed   the  appointment  in  a  Senate  speech  June  5  and  at-
tended  Dr.  Wu's  swearing  in,  where  the  Senator  found  him-
self  among  old  friends.  Dr.  Wu's  superior  is  Dr.  G.  Warren
Nutter,  the  new  Assistant  Secretary  of  State  for  International
From  the  Spider  to  the  Fly?
"[Harold]   Kaplan    (U.S.    delegation   spokesman   in
Paris)   was   asked   to   explain   how  the   disposition  of
allied  forces  in  the   South   can  be  a   'military   house-
keeping'  problem  for  the  allies  and  simultaneously  a
door-opening   move   toward   peace.    If   the   recall   of
25,000  American  forces  is  only  a  'replacement'  of  them
by  South  Vietnamese  forces  (terminology  that  Saigon
has  insisted  upon  in  place  of  'withdrawal')  Kaplan  was
asked,  will  the  total   remain   unchanged?    'It  is    per-
fectly   true   that   as   our  forces   are   replaced   by   the
South  Vietnamese  and  other  allied   forces  there,   the
total   strength   on   the   allied   side   does   not   change,'
Kaplan  replied.   'But   the  fact  remains,'  he  said,  'that
the  withdrawal  of  non-South  Vietnamese  forces  should,
if   the   other  side   is   disposed   to   go   down  the   road,
constitute  an  opening,  a  possible  invitation  .  .  ."
—Murray  Murder  in  the  Washington  Post,  June  27.
Security  Affairs.   The  ISA  is  the  Pentagon's   own  little   State
Department   and   Dr.   Nutter   has  been   described   (by   Karl
Hess,  Goldwater's  famous  ghost  writer)  as  "the  anchor  man"
of   Goldwater's   "think   tank  team"   in   1964.   And   Nutter's
superior,  of  course,  is  Secretary  of  Defense   Laird,  who  pre-
sided  over  the  writing  of  Goldwater's.platform  in  1964,   and
whose  inflammatory  campaign  for  the  ABM  is  hardly  calcu-
lated   to   make  the   Russians   feel   they  are  dealing   with   an
Administration  soberly  and  sincerely  anxious  for  arms  talks
and  detente.
This  sour  impression  will  not  be  corrected  by  the  political
complexion  of  the  General  Advisory  Committee  Nixon  has
just  appointed  to the  Arms Control  and  Disarmament  Agency.
The  most  prominent  appointee  is  Dean  Rusk,  whom  Nixon
greatly  admires;  no  Secretary  of   State  ever  cared   less  about
disarmament.   The   most  disquieting  appointee   is  that   same
William   J.   Casey,  the   lawyer-public  relations   man  who   is
chairman  of  the  Citizens  Committee  for  Peace  With  Security
which  was  organized  out  of  the  White  House  basement  and
has  already  distinguished  itself  by a  highly  dubious  poll  show-
ing  84%—why  not  99%  ?—of  the  American  people  in  favor
of  the  ABM.  There  is  not  one  strong  voice  for   disarmament
on  the  advisory  committee;  the  doves  are  weak,  the  hawks
are  strong.   This   should   be  no   surprise.   A  President   who
wanted  Senator  Jackson  as  Secretary  of  Defense   and   settled
for   Laird,  and  whose  most   influential   mentor   seems  to   be
Major   General   Strom  Thurmond,   is  not  likely  to   negotiate
an  end  to  the  arms  race.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send A  Sample  Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send A  Ung   Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City                                       Zip                State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please  renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City                                       Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                  7/14/69
4420  29th  St.   N.W.,    Washington,  D. C.  20008
IE    Stone's  Weekly
4420  29th  St.,   N.W.
Washington,   0.  C.  20008
(Note  Corrected  Address)
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage   Paid  at   Washington,   D. G.   Published   every   other   Monday   at   4420   29th   St.    N.  W..   Washington,   D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;    )6  In  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  »17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED