I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969jan13.pdf

============================================================

How  Fulbright  Hastily  Shoved  ihe. Tonkin   Gulf  Inquiry   Under  the Rug,  P.  4
Maybe  Nixon  Can  Get  Him  A  Welfare  Supplement
"I  don't  intend  to  live  on  $30,000  a  year."                               he       II  not  give  up   all  outside   income  when  he  takes   his
—Electronics   magnate   David   Packard,    explaining    that     $30,000-a-year   job   as   Deputy   Secretary   of    Defense.
/. F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi-Weekly                    *^
XVII,  NO. 1
JANUARY   13,   1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D.  C.
20  CENTS
The  Need  for Double  Vision  in  the  Middle  East
One  way  to  approach  the  Middle  Eastern  crisis  is  to  recog-
nize that  Israel  is an  island  in  a hostile  sea.    Its  only  swift  and
sure  access  to  the  rest  of  the  world  is  by  air.    You  cannot  go
by  train from  Cairo to  Tel  Aviv's neighboring  city  Jaffa,  as you
still  could  in   1945  when   I  first  visited  Palestine,  nor  fake  a
taxi  from  Jerusalem  to  Amman  or  from  Haifa  to  Beirut,  or
to  Damascus,  as  I  still  could  in  three  memorable  trips  in   1947.
There  is  no  exit  by  land  from  Israel  today;  the  sea  route  is
slow,  and  in  time  of  war  rendered  insecure by  Soviet   supplied
naval  vessels  in  the  hands  of  the  Egyptians  and  by  the  new
presence  of  the  Soviet  navy  itself  in  the  Mediterranean.     Only
the  air  is  Israel's  open   door  to  the  rest  of  the  world.     More
than  any  other  nation  today  it  is  the  child  of  the  air  age.    Its
swift  victory  in  the  six  day  war  last  year  was  a  lightning vic-
tory  by airpower.    A  major  element  in  its  balance  of  payments,
the  tourist  trade,  depends  on  the  air.    By  air  it  is  only  a  few
hours from  New  York, London  and Paris.    In  the  days of  the
Romans  and  centuries later  of  the  great  Arab empires  in North
Africa  and  Spain,  it  took  slow  and  arduous  months  for  Jewish
pilgrims   and  poets  to  reach  the  Holy  Land.     Today   only  a
few  hours  separates  Israel  from  its  Jewish  supporters   in  the
outside   world.     Perhaps   most   fundamentally  of   all,  the  air
alone   saves  Israel  from  the  claustrophobia   and   despair   of  a
nation  besieged   ever  since  its  birth  20  years  ago.
Israel's  Jugular  Vein
The  new  target  of  the  Arab  guerrillas  is that  lifeline.    It  is
as vulnerable  as a man's  jugular  vein.    Israel's  national  airline,
El  Al,  owns   seven   jets.    When  one  was  hi-jacked  in  Rome
early  last  year  and  another   attacked   in  Athens   a  few   weeks
ago,  the  Arab  guerrillas  hit  Israel's  most  sensitive point.    This
was  no  sporadic  shelling  of  a  border   settlement  or  even   the
bombing  of   a  crowded   Jerusalem   market.     The   threat,   the
repercussions  and  the  possibilities  were  of  a  far  graver  order.
El  Al  is  one  of  the  few  national  airlines  which  is  in  the  black.
It  would  only  take  a  few  unsuccessful  attacks  to  frighten  away
much  of  its  business;  what  the  Arab  guerrillas  could  not  do  at
Israel's  well-guarded   main  airport   in  Lydda,  they  might  do
abroad.     The   next   step  would   be  attacks  on  other  airlines
which  fly  into  Israel.    I  can  still  remember  my  own  desperate
feelings  in  Paris,  on  my  way  to  Palestine  on  the  eve  of   the
1948   war,  when   the  airlines  stopped  flying  into  Lydda  and
getting  there  depended  on  a  chance  lift  on  a  special  Haganah
plane  from  Geneva.    To  cut  the  air  link  would  be  to  close  an
iron  ring  around   Israel.
A  New   Kennedy-McCarthy   Contest
The  liberal  Democratic  "study"  group  in  the  House
is  notoriously anemic  and  we  were  not  surprised  by  its
swift  defeat  in  a  half-hearted  (as  ever)  attempt  to  re-
place  Speaker  McCormack.    But  it  was  a  pleasure  to
see  Edward Kennedy unseat  Long  as  majority whip  in
the  Senate  which has  too  often  seemed  the  last   strong-
hold  of  the  Confederacy.    Kennedy's  energy,  the  pres-
tige   of   his   name  and  the   vigor  of   his   own   machine
made  possible  an  outcome  no  other  Senator  could  have
achieved.    His  finest  accolade  was  the   sour  comment
from  Smathers of  Florida  that  Kennedy's victory  means
"the   sophomores   and  the  liberals  will  be  running  the
party"  and  his   hint  that  he  might   turn   Republican.
That  would  be  an  exh'iaratin     loss.    Nf-w we  wait  to
see  what  Kennedy  will  ao  wit a  uis  new  pust.   The  first
test   will  be   how   fully   the   Democrats  scrutinize   the
records  and  views  of  the  Nixon  Cabinet  appointments.
After   the   caucus,   Mansfield  as   majority   leader   said
that  "a  Senate  which  did  not  abdicate  its  independent
constitutional   responsibilities   under  a  Democratic  ad-
ministration  will  not  lay  them  aside  under  a  Republi-
can."    The  chesty  rhetoric  bears  slight  resemblance  to
the  flaccid  record  made by  the  Senate  under  his  leader-
ship,   especially   in  foreign  policy.    His  actions  rarely
match  his  enlightened  views.    Will  Mansfield  and Ken-
nedy  weakly  rubber-stamp  the  appointment,  as   Secre-
tary   of   Defense,   of   Melvin   Laird  whose   apocalyptic
right-wing  philosophy  we  called  to  public  attention  in
our  last  issue?    A  Democratic  Senate  refused  to  con-
firm  Lewis   Strauss   as   Secretary  of   Commerce  under
Eisenhower.    We  believe  the  Senate   should  refuse   to
confirm   Laird  under  Nixon.    This  is  McCarthy's  test,
too.     He  declined  to  vote  for  Kennedy  on  the  ground
that   the   latter's   victory   would  provide   the   illusion
rather  than  the  reality  of  a  change.    Was  this   personal
pique   or   radical   insight?      The   confirmation  debate
over  Laird  will  provide  the  answer  and  show  whether
McCarthy  has  the  mettle  for  a  more  militant   alterna-
tive  leadership.
It  is  foolish  in  this  perspective   to  ask  why  Israel   retaliated
against  Lebanon,  its  one  moderate  Arab  neighbor  and  the  only
one  which  has  done  little  or  no  fighting  against  it,  the  only
neighboring  Arab  State  which   has  protected  its  own  Jewish
minority  from   persecution   in  the  blind   furies  unleashed  by
three   Arab-Israeli   -wars.    The   reprisal   was  not   against   the
Lebanon.     It  was  against   the  Arab  air  lines,   and—to   speak
frankly—the   British   companies   which   insure   them   and   the
(Continued  On  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  13, 1969
(Continued  From  Page   One)
American  companies  which  finance  them.    .It  was  struck  at
the  nerve  center  and  main  air  gateway of  the  Arab world,  the
Beirut  airport.    It  sought  by  damaging  the  Arab  airlines  and
their  financial  links  in  London   and  New  York  to  warn  the
aviation  world  that  airports  had  best  be  kept  safe  for  all  na-
tions,  Israel  included.   These  are the  blunt truths of  the  Beirut
affair,  and  this  is  a  message  which  had  best  get  a  full  debate
in   the   air  age.     For   airports  can  easily   become  a  new  and
critical  nerve  point   in  all  the  various  short-of-war  struggles
which   afflict   a  cantankerous  and   quarrelsome  mankind.
Political  Victory  of  The  Guerrillas
The  price  paid  by  Israel  was  a  political victory for  the  Arab
guerrilla  movements.    Israel  has  never  been  as  isolated  as  it
is  today  in  the  wake  of  its  unanimous  condemnation  by  the
Security  Council.    The  Israeli  cabinet,  according  to  reports  in
Israel's   most   respected   newspaper   Haaretz,   was  deeply  split
on  the  eve  of  the  reprisal  raid.    Its  magnitude,   despite  the
sensational  success  in  carrying  it  off  without  any  loss  of   life,
was  bound  to  seem  so disproportionate  as  to  evoke condemna-
tion.    To  strike  at  Lebanon,  half  Christian  in  population,  still
substantially  French  in  culture,  was  bound  to  arouse traditional
protective  sympathies  in  the  Vatican  and  in  Paris,    It  would
be  just  as  well  for  Jewish  spokesmen   to  keep  their  cool  about
the  reactions  of  Pope  Paul  and  de  Gaulle,  and  not  make  more
enemies.     The   feeling   of   Rome   for   the   ancient   Christian
communities   of   the   Lebanon   is   as  natural   as   those   of   the
Jews  for  Israel.    The  first  point  of  repair  should  be  with  Le-
banon,  for  its  success  in  welding  Christian  and  Moslem  com-
munities  into  a  stable  nation  is  a  model  for  what  must  sooner
or  later  develop  in  some  form  between  Israel  and  the  Pales-
tinian  Arabs  if  there  is  to  be  peace  in  the  Middle  East.
Indeed   at   a   time   when   Ulster's   bloody   battles   between
Catholic  and  Protestant  in  Ireland  show  that  even  the  embers
of  Cromwell's  cruel  time  still  smolder,  Lebanon   seems  to  be
about  the  only  place  in  the  world  (look  at  Belgium  torn  be-
tween  Fleming  and  Walloon,  and  at  French  Canada!)   where
bi-national  and  multi-national solutions  are  working smoothly.
Something  of  the  sort  must  come  in  a  reconstructed  Palestine
of  Jewish  and  Arab  states  in  peaceful  co-existence.    To  bring
it  about  Israel  and  the  Jewish  communities  of  the  world  must
Somebody's   Going  To  Wake  Up   Screaming
" 'I  will  sleep  better  with  Henry  Kissinger  in  Wash-
ington,'   remarked  Prof.   Adam   Yarmolinsky.   ...      'I
think    it's    an    excellent     appointment,'   said    Arthur
Schlesinger,  Jr. ...     John  Kenneth  Galbraith called  the
appointment  of  his  friend  a  'good  one."  "
—New   York   Times   from   Harvard   Dec.   It  on    Prof.
Kissinger's   appointment    as   Nixon's    "Walt   Rostow"
"The   appointment   of   Henry   Kissinger   by   Richard
Nixon   to  his  critical  post   is  very   good  news,  say  we.
Say  also  a  lot  of  other  people,  some  of  them  unreliable
judges  of  just  what  kind  of  a  man  the  President  ought
to  be  listening  to  when  it  comes  to  foreign  policy.  .  .  .
But   Mr.  Kissinger   is   somewhat   a  little   unusual,  and
we  choose  to  believe   that   it   is   this   which  above  all
commended   him   to   the   attention   of   Nixon:  he   is   a
realist,   a  patriot,  he  sees  a  problem   whole,  is   some-
times  a  little dreamy  on  disarmament  matters—but  one
cannot   walk  away   from   any  of  his   books  or  articles,
or  know  something   about  the  history   of   his  contribu-
tions  to  American  strategic  thinking,  and  be  less  than
grateful  for  his  appointment."
—Buckley's  National  Review,  December 17
be willing  to  look  some  unpleasant  truths  squarely in  the  face,
and  to  rise  to  heights  of  magnanimity which  could  write  the
finest  chapter   in  the  history  of  a  great   people.
One  is to  recognize  that  the  Arab'guerrillas are  doing  to  us
what   our   terrorists   and   saboteurs   of   the   Irgun,   Stern   and
Haganah  did  to  the  British.   Another  is to  be willing  to admit
that  their  motives  are  as  honorable  as  were  ours.    As  a  Jew,
even  as  I  felt  revulsion  against  the  terrorism,  I  felt  itjustified
by the  homelessness  of  the  surviving Jews  from  the Nazi camps
and  the' bitter  scenes  when  refugee  ships  sank,  or  sank  them-
selves,  when  refused  admission  to  Palestine.    The  best  of  Arab
youth  feels  the  same way; they  cannot  forget  the  atrocities  com-
mitted  by  us  against  villages  like  Deir  Yassin,  nor  the  uproot-
ing  of   the   Palestinian   Arabs  from  their   ancient   homeland,
for  which  they  feel  the  same  deep  ties  of  sentiment  as  do  so
many  Jews,  however  assimilated  elsewhere.
We  made  the  Palestinian  Arabs  homeless  to  make  a  home
for  our  own  people.    That  is  the  simple  truth  as  history will
see it,  and  until we  make  amends  and  resettle  the  refugees  and
create  a  new  political  framework  in  which  Jew  and  Arab  can
live  together   in  a  new  and  greater  Palestine  there  will  be  no
GAO  More  Vigilant  About  Poverty  Program  Than  Mismanaged   Pentagon  Billions
The  New  Year  brought   two  more  striking  examples  of
how  our  huge  military  establishment  not  only  wastes   money
but  does  its  best  to  hide  the  facts.    An  Air  Force  efficiency
expert   was   stripped   of   his   Civil   Service   protection   after
telling   the  Joint  Economic   Committee   the  C-5A   transport
.was  going  to  cost  $2  billion  more  than  had  been   estimated.
A  civilian  petroleum  expert  was  transferred   from   Bangkok
to  a  routine  job  in  Washington   because  he  wrote   Senator
Proxmire   about   the  waste  of   oil   in  Thailand.     Proxmire
asked   the  General   Accounting   Office   to  investigate   and  it
reported   bribery   and  forgery   led  to  the  theft   of   at  least
5.5  million  gallons  in   1967.
It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  GAO  only   investigated
because  the  Senator   asked   it  to  do  so,  and  that   the  report
was  made  public  by  the  Senator.    The  GAO  is  proving  to
be  a  lax  and  toothless  watchdog   where  the  military  is   con-
cerned.    The last  Congress  ordered  two  GAO inquiries  which
involve   the  waste  of  public  funds.    One  was  to   determine
the  feasibility   of  uniform  cost  accounting   in  military  pro-
curement.   The second was  to  look  into the  poverty  program.
When  we  checked  with  the  GAO,  we  were  told  that   "four,
five,  maybe  six"   employes   were  on  the  defense  study   while
the  poverty  program  inquiry  involved  "200  to  300"  investi-
gators.    Yet  the  Pentagon  spends   close  to  $80  billion,  the
poverty   program   less  than  two.
The   Pentagon's   deputy   liaison   to   the   GAO   feasibility
study,   B.  B.  Lynn,  said  in  a  speech  last  year  that  "if  the
results  of  our study  are  considered  productive  ...     it  would
be  more  because  we  succeeded   in  advancing  the  state  of  the
art   [of  accounting]  than  because  of  any  specific   conclusion
we  reached   as  to  whether   or  not  uniform  cost   accounting
standards   -are   feasible."     His   superior,   John   Malloy,   told
us  Lynn  hadn't  "reached  any  conclusions   yet.".   But  Malloy
himself   expected   the   result   to   be  the   formulation   of   an
extensive   questionnaire    which   would   ask   the    industries
themselves   whether  or  not  uniform  cost  accounting  stand-
ards  are feasible!   This  is  like  asking  a kidnaper if  he  favors
the  Lindbergh   Act.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  January  13, 1969
peace.    This  is  a  tragic  quarrel  of  brothers,  requiring  for  its
resolution  that  healing  double  vision  which  may  at  last  enable
each  to  see  with  pity  the  all  too  human  fears  and  features  of
the  Other,  who  is  only  the  mirror  image  of  ourselves,  tightly
embraced  in  hate,  where  love  alone  can  free.
The  Arab  Refugee  The  No.  1  Problem
Self-pity  and  self-righteousness, the  psychic  counterparts  of
the  siege,  can  only  block  a  solution.    Just  as  the  lofty  sky  is
Israel's  physical  way  out,  so  its  political  and  spiritual  way  out
must  be  to  rise  to  a  higher  plane  of  understanding.    To  do  so
is  to  clear  the  way  for  the  political  initiatives which  can  alone
free  it  from  isolation.    If   Israel  wishes  to  avoid  an   imposed
solution,  then  it  must  come  forward  with  alternative  construc-
tive  proposals  of  its  own.    These  should  be  seen  not  as  giving
away  bargaining  cards  in  advance  but  as a  means  of   preventing
that  polarization  of  sentiment  in  both  the  Jewish   and  Arab
communities  the  die-hards  on  both  sides  seek,  whether   Arab
guerrillas  or  military-minded Israeli.    In  some  form  or  another
this  must  involve  a  federated  co-existence  among  Israel,   the
Palestinian  Arabs  and  the  Jordanians,  with  access  to  the  sea
for   Jordan  and  the  West  Bank.    The  foundation  for  such  a
political   settlement  must  be  a  major  effort   to  end  the   Arab
refugee   problem  once  and  for  all  time.    To  this  the   world
Jewish   community  must   show   the   same  generosity   we   have
shown  our  own  uprooted  people.    So long  as more  than  a  mil-
lion  Palestinians  live  in  homeless  misery  there  will  be  no  peace
for   Israel,  and  there  should  be  no  peace  of  mind   for   world
Jewry.   This  is  the  wrong  we  must   right.
I   believe   that   Charles   W.   Yost,  the   American   diplomat
Nixon  has  recalled  from  retirement   to  act  as  the  U.S.   repre-
sentative  at  the  United  Nations,  is  well  suited  by  experience,
insight   and  humanity  to  further  this  cause  of   reconciliation.
I  recommend  his  article on  the  1967  war,  "How   It  Began,"  in
the  January   1968   issue  of  Foreign   Affairs    and  the  article  he
wrote  just  before  his  appointment  for  the  January,  1969,   issue
of  The  Atlantic  Monthly,   "Israel  and  The  Arabs:  The  Myths
That  Block  Peace."    I  agree  with  the  broad  outlines  of  a  solu-
tion  as  he  has  outlined  them.    A  certain  hopeful   convergence
of  forces  toward  a  solution  is  visible  in  the  November,   1967,
resolution  of  the  Security  Council,  the  Jarring  mission  and  in
the   drawing   closer   of   the   four   big  powers  toward    unified
action.    "Neither  Israel  nor  the  Arabs,"  The  Times  of  London
was quite  right  in  warning  Jan.  2,  "can  act  as  if  they  were  con-
ducting   a  private  vendetta   in  a  vacuum."     The   Middle   East
is  not  Southeast  Asia.    The  Middle  East  is  still  the  cross-roads
Thirty  Years   Late
As  one  of  his  final  acts  in  office,  Secretary  of  Labor
Wirtz  finally  issued  an  order  requiring uranium  mines
to  meet  standards  of  radiation  exposure  first  proposed
in  the  late  1930's  by  the  International  Commission  on
Radiation  Protection.   Until now  a  coalition  of  uranium
industry   and  military  interests   had  blocked   adoption
of   this   international  standard.     Because    of   this   30-
year  delay  Leo  Goodman  of  the  UAW—a  tireless  cru-
sader    for   nuclear   safety—has    estimated    that    6500
American  miners  will  die  of  lung  cancer  by  1987.
At  recent   Labor  Dept.  hearings   Prof.  Robley   Evans
of  MIT  declared  that  the  old  standards—which  allowed
for   3  times  as  much  radon  gas   exposure   as  the  new
level—were  safe.   Although  Prof.  Evans  only identified
himself   as  a  representative  of  the  AEC,  a  spokesman
for  Kerr-McGee later  revealed  that  Evans  has  been  a
consultant  for  this  company-»-one  of  the  largest   uran-
ium   producers   in   the   country—since   1961!     Another
witness  who testified against  the  stricter  standards  said
that  mine  workers—just  like  everybody's   maid  in  the
Old  South—tell  him  all  the  time  that  they'd  rather  risk
cancer  than  the  cold  which  the  witness  said  would  re-
sult  from  ventilated  mines.
of  the  world.     Only  Berlin  could  be  a  more  dangerous  place
for  a  confrontation  of  the  nuclear  superpowers.
Both   Washington   and   Moscow   for   all   their   rivalry   are
soberly  aware  of  the  dangers.    If  Israel  and  the  Arabs  cannot
agree,  some  solution  will  have  to  be  imposed  which  can  allow
both  to  leave  in  peace.    The  die-hards  on  both  sides  feel   this
settlement  approaching,  and  would  like  to upset it with  desper-
ate  action.    The  Beirut  affair  must  be  seen  in  this   perspective,
too.     The   fanatical  agree  only  in  stalling  for   time.     But  it
is  a  myth,  as  Yost  wrote  in  The  Atlantic  Monthly,   to  believe
that  time  works   in  anyone's   favor   in  the  Middle  East.     "A
settlement  during  coming  months  on  the basis of  the November
resolution  may  still  be  feasible,"   Yost  wrote.    "Later  it  may
not  be.    Provocation  and  counter-provocation    may  become  so
shocking   and   intolerable   that  compromise   will  be   politically
out  of  the  question.     If   the  parties  cannot   themselves   come
to  a  settlement,   it  will  be  high  time  for  the  UN,  with  Great
Power  backing,  to  take  the  initiative.  .  .  .  After  twenty  years,
so  many  dead,  so  much  waste  and  suffering,  world  peace  more
and  more  threatened,  there  is  no  time  to  lose."    To  this  we
can  only  say  Amen.
Nixon's  No.  2 Man for  Pentagon  Calls  Arms  Reduction  "Advantageous" To U.S.  and USSR
"David  Packard,  deputy  secretary  of  defense-designate  in
the  Nixon  administration said  today  arms  reduction  would
be  'advantageous'  to  both  the  United  States  and  Russia.   A
slow-down  in  the  armaments  race  would  help  'mantain  sta-
bility'  in  the   world  and  lower  the  enormous  expenditures
the  two  world  powers  are  pouring  into  weaponry,  Packard
said.    But  the  multi-millionaire electronics  executive   also
told  newsmen  at  a  press  conference  at  his  firm's  Page   Mill
Road  headquarters  in  Palo  Alto  a  basic  balance  of  power
must  be  maintained between  the  two  countries.    [The  refer-
ence   to  "basic   balance"  rather  than  nuclear  superority   is
noteworthy—IFS.]
"Packard,  56,  said  the  one  priority  'overriding  everything
else'  is  that  'we  must  do  everything  possible  to  avoid  a  nu-
clear  conflagration.'   He  said  he  is  deeply  aware  of  former
President   Eisenhower's   concern  about  the  influence  in  na-
tional  life  exerted  by  the  so-called  military  industrial  com-
plex.  ...    He  added he hopes  a  balance can be maintained be-
tween the nation's military and security  requirements and  the
other  problems  confronting  the  country—particularly  those
of  minorities with which Packard said, 'I have some familiar-
ity.'   Packard  has  been  a  prime  mover  in  a  local  version  of
the  Urban  Coalition,  in  which  the  private  sector  is  involved
in  helping  to  establish  businesses  and find  jobs  for minority
peoples.  . . .
"Packard  said  the  new  team  at  the  Pentagon  will  review
the    antiballistic   missile    program,   the    need    to    update
weapons  and  the  question  of  whether  enough  research   and
development  is  being   accomplished.  .  .  .  -Packard  said  the
Middle  East  situation  is  the  most  dangerous  facing  the  na-
tion  now,  and  he  said  the  Israeli  attack  on  a  Lebanese   air-
port  last  week-end  'won't  help  in  any  way.'"
—John  Keplinger,  political  editor  of  the  Palo  Alto,  Cal.,
Times,  Dec.  SI.    The  wire  services  we  saw  did  not   carry
Packard's   pro-arms   reduction   views   in   this   home-town
interview.   We  reprint   it   here,  and   his   reference    to   the
Middle   East,  for   their  news  value.   We  will  comment  on
his  appointment  in  a  succeeding   issue.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  January  13,  19C9
With  Morse  Gone,  Will  Gore  or  McCarthy  Step  In  And  Give  Us  The  Whole Truth?
How  Fulbright  Hastily  Shoved  the  Tonkin  Gulf  Inquiry  Under  the Rug
Chairman  Fulbright  and  the  Senate Foreign  Relations  Com-
mittee  have  been  derelict  in  the  Tonkin  Gulf   affair.     They
have  ended  their  investigation with  an  obscure release  of  docu-
ments  on  the  eve  of  the  Christmas holidays, when  it  was  cer-
tain  to  attract  as  little  attention  as  possible.    The  basic  ques-
tion  was  not  past  scandal  but  wiser  action  in  a  future  crisis.
It  involved  two  interrelated  problems  in  what  Pentagon  argot
calls  command  and  control.    One  was  the  President's  control
over  our  vast  military  and  intelligence  network.     The   other
was  the  control  of  Congress  over  sufficient  reliable information
when   asked  to  share  responsibility.    Command   and   control
broke  down  in  both.    The  White  House  acted  on  dubious in-
formation   and   the   Congress   on   serious  falsifications   by  the
White  House  and  Pentagon.    The  country  deserved  a  full  in-
quiry  and  a  careful  report  by the  Committee,  for  next  time  the
stakes  may  be  higher.
A  Peculiar  Way  To  Run  An  Inquiry
The  Committee  has  closed  its  books  without  completing  its
investigation   and   without   making   a   report.     It   held   three
hearings  in  closed   session,  on  August  6,  1964,  in  May 1966
and  on  Feb. 20,  1968.   Censored   transcripts  have  been  re-
leased  only  of  the  first  and  third.    It  tied  one  hand  behind  its
back   by  deciding  not  to  interrogate  those  participants  who
were  so  disturbed  by  the   falsifications   that  they  volunteered
their   testimony.     These   included   Naval   personnel   in   the
Tonkin  Gulf  during  the  alleged  attack  Aug.  4,  1964,  and  per-
sonnel  who handled  the  intelligence  messages  in the  Pentagon's
command  and  control  center  that  night.
The  Committee  limited  itself  to  a  study  of  the  documents
the  Pentagon  was  willing  to  supply—and  then  decided  not  to
release  the  study  even  of  these  documents  as  prepared  by  its
own  Committee  staff.    Fortunately  much  of  this  material  was
made  public  by  Morse   in  his  Senate  speeches   last  February
21,  28  and  29.    With  his  defeat  in  the  last  election,  there  is
no  one  left  on  the  committee who  has  yet  shown  his  courage,
insight  and  energy.    Gore  or  McCarthy  could  fill  the  void  if
they  really  wanted  to.
Fulbright   promised  the  Senate  last  March  22  to  pursue  the
questions  left  unanswered  by  the  hearing  last  February.    The
only  result  is  the  documents  released  as  "Part  II"  of  the  Ton-
Lunar  Voyages  and  Earthly  Lunacy
In   the   wake   of   the   first   manned   trip   around   the
moon,  what  earth  needs  is  a  true  parliament  of  man,
with  power to  decide  where we  go  from  here.    Profes-
sor   Kistiakowsky,   who  was   Eisenhower's  science  ad-
viser,  called  the  trip  a  spectator sport  in  a  CBS  inter-
view  Dec.  29  and  doubted  its  social  utility.    The  next
step,  a  manned  landing  on  the  moon,  will  bring the  cost
to  $30  billion  (he  estimated)  and  a  manned  flight  to
Mars   $300  billion.    The   Russians  are  spending  com-
parable  sums  in  the  space  race.    Have  the  two  super-
powers  the  right  to  pour  out  so  much  of  man's wealth,
energy,   ingenuity   and   resources   on   stunts   in   outer
space  when  more  than  half  mankind  scratches  out  a
miserable  ill-fed  existence,  and  faces  famine before  the
end  of  the  century?    In  the  U.S.,  aerospace  has become
our  biggest  manufacturing  industry,  employing nearly
half  our  scientists  and  engineers,  thriving on  the  arms
race  and  the  space  race.    It  is  the  biggest  gravy  train
on  earth.    Is  there  no  way  to  mobilize  a counterforce?
kin  Gulf  inquiry  Dec.   16  and  briefly  covered  in  a  few  news-
papers  Dec. 20.    Whoever  drafted  the  one-page  preface  for
Fulbright  was  a  master  of  the  equivocal  and  the  opaque.    It
hides  his  biggest  failure.    It  makes  no  reference  to  the  Pen-
tagon's   refusal   to  hand  over  a  command  and  control   report
which  became known  to  the  Committee  through  an  anonymous
letter.    This  indicated  that  the  President  acted  on  dubious  in-
formation,  and  in  haste,  because  he  could  no  longer  wait  for
prime TV  time in which  to announce the Tonkin  Gulf  reprisals
to  the  country.   The  Committee had  the  name  of  the  man  who
wrote  the  report  and  could  have  called  him  as  a  witness.    It
weakly  acquiesced  in  the  Pentagon's  refusal.   "The  study,"  as
assistant  Secretary of  Defense  Paul  C. Warnke  coolly informed
Fulbright  in  one  of  the  letters  released  in  Part  II,  "is  not  con-
sidered  appropriate for  dissemination outside the  Department."
Fulbright  connives  in  this  bureaucratic  cheek  by  releasing  this
letter  with  the  other  documents  not—as  his  preface  says—"to
revive  the  controversy"  but  "because  of  the  possible  historical
interest!"     In  effect  he  covers  up  for  Johnson   at  the  end  of
this  inquiry  as  he  did  at  the  beginning.
We  Regret  That  Delays  in  Britain  and  the  Dock  Strikes  Here  Have  Held  Up  Shipments  of  "The Haunted
Fifties"—Orders  Will  Be  Filled  As  Soon  As  They   Arrive
For  th
A Tim
(To)   ]
Street
City
Please
Name
Street
City
5618
FOR  STONE'S
e  enclosed  $6.95  send
e of  Torment  (Random
Vame
Zip
NEW   BOOK
I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
House)  regular price  $7.95
State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement   wished   D
renew   (or  enter)  a
Zip
sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                 vis/69
Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W., Washington,  D. C.  20015
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,   D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.     Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.   D.   C.     Published  every  other  Monday  at  5618 Nebraska Ave.. N.W.,  Washington. D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;  56  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:' $20  to  Israel. Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED