I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969apr07.pdf

============================================================

Oppenbeimer's  Prosecutor Named  to  Court  of  Appeals,  P.  3
The  Question  Which  Had  Better  Keep  The White  House  Awake  At  Night
"Even   after   voting  twice  in   four   years   for   Presidents     the streets  to get  it?"
who  promised  peace,   must  Americans   once  again  go  into         —Tom  Wicker   in  the  New  York  Times,  March  20.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
/\/x»-»i»    iJ/tM  Lit* rM/»x/    At*—  \\/     yz/7/3/At                                  ^^^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.   XVII,  NO.  7
APRIL  7,  1969
»'<"       WASHINGTON,  D.C.
20  CENTS
Well, If  It  Ain't  Little  Old  Lyndon  B. Nixon
In  the  second  half  of  the  Nineteenth  century,  Great  Britain
was  swept  by  a  series  of  war  scares.   The  happy  result—for
the   British   Navy—was   that   its  annual   appropriations  were
more  than  doubled.    "In   each  case,"  Alfred  Vagts  wrote  in
his  History   of  Militarism   (1959    rev.  ed),   "the   alarmist  cry
rang  out  that  the  country  was  threatened  by  French  naval  in-
creases  or  plans  for  such  increases  designed  for  the  invasion
of  England.   In  each  case  it  was  subsequently  disclosed   that
no  such  plans  had  existed."   A  Chancellor  of  the   Exchequer,
Sir  William  Harcourt,  battling  this  expensive  nonsense,   used
words  in  1893   which  apply  with  equal  justice to  the  current
scare  tactics  of  Defense   Secretary   Laird   and  the   Pentagon.
"The   principle  of  the  alarmist,"  Sir  William  said,  "is  to  pile
up  every  conceivable  contingency,  probable  or  improbable,  on
one  side  and  to  admit  no  possible  contingency  on  the  other."
A  similar  point  was  made  when  the  nuclear  scientist,  W.  K.
H.  Panofsky,  testifying  against  the  Nixon  anti-ballistic missile,
told  the  Gore  subcommittee  of  Senate  Foreign  Relations  March
28,  "I  can  think  of  no  better  prescription  for  accelerating   the
arms  race  than  by  taking  the  position  that  we  must   prepare
a   fully   safe  counter-measure   for   any  technically  imaginable
contingency."   This  is  the  strategy  of  the  electronics  industry
in  pushing  the  ABM  as  it  was  the  strategy  of  British  armor-
plate,  shipbuilding  and  gunpowder   interests  in  the  Nineteenth
Century   when   they  were  pushing  the  naval   race,  first  with
France   and   then   with   Germany.    The   mendacity   and   the
effrontery   are  the  same.   Only  the  price   tags  have  gone   up,
and the  destructive  peril.
No  Mega-Murder-Mathematics  Required
The  Panofsky   appearance  was  a  godsend  for  citizens  who
cannot  cope  with  the  intricacies  of   mega-murder-mathematics.
It  is  difficult  even  for  experts  to  follow  the  intricacies  of  nu-
clear  war-gaming,   and  it  is  impossible  to  prove  a   negative.*
But  anyone  can  tell  from  the  Panofsky  incident  whether  we
are dealing with  honest  men.
It  seems  that  service  in  the  Pentagon  doth   make  liars  of
*  "For   instance,"  the  art  critic  Frank  Getlein  wrote  in  the   VT'uih-
ington   Star   March   26,   satirizing   Laird's   mode   of   testimony,   "we
have   no  real  reason  to  believe  that  the  Chinese  are  not  even  now
engaged    in   digging   a   huge   tunnel   under   the   Capitol.    Mao   has
neither    affirmed   nor   denied   that   this   work   is   going   forward   and
therefore  we  have  no  right  to  assume that  it  isn't.   That  being  so,  the
Department   of  Defense  ought  to  let  contracts  at  once—without  com-
petitive  bidding,  natch;  that  only  slows  things  up—for  giant  earth-
probe  machinery,   mammoth  balloons   which   could   hold   the   Capitol
upright   after   the  Yellow   Peril   knocks  out   the  last  support,    [and]
a   Congressmen's   Retrieval    System    for   Defense    Friends   on    the
Hill  . . ."
Dwight  David   Eisenhower
As  commander-iii-chief  in  World  War  II  Eisenhower
was   no   military   genius;   he   was   a   chairman   of   the
board;   his   friendly  capacity   for   getting   along   with
people  was  his  forte;  he  held  the  reins  capably  over  a
high-spirited   team.   As   a  political   leader,  he  was   a
front   man  for   the   Establishment.   A   man  who  could
be  the  ADA's  wistful  hope  for  President  in  1948 and
then  the  Republican candidate  in  1952  was  not  a  man
of  strong  views.  He  had  only  foggy  notions of  the  free
enterprise  ideology  he  preached; after  all  he  had  spent
a  lifetime  in  the cradle-to-the-grave security of military
service  —  the  only  American  counterpart of  the  total
welfare  state.   There  remain  two  black  marks  on  his
record.   He   was   afraid   to   defend    his   great    friend
and   mentor,   George  Marshall,  in   the   1952  campaign
against  the  ugly  slurs  of  Joe  McCarthy.  The  other  was
his  failure  to  offer  an  apology  in  the  U-2  affair  to  save
the  Paris  summit  and  the  political  future  of  Khrush-
chev  who  had  staked  it  on  the  view  that  Ike  was  "a
good  guy"  and  a  man  of  peace.   Ike  was  both,  but  he
was  also  weak  and  had  the  typical  Army  man's   dis-
inclination   to   hard   work;  firmer  supervision   of   the
CIA   might  have  prevented  that  disastrous   "accident."
We   remember  nonetheless  that   though   a   soldier,  he
was  not  a  militarist.   He  vetoed  the  ABM  and  held  the
Pentagon   budget  down.   Like  Washington's   Farewell,
Eisenhower's   warned   against   the   military.    His  final
and  indelible  phrase  about  a  military-industrial com-
plex   gave   the   peace   forces   their   strongest   rallying
cry.    We  salute  him  for  it.
them   all.   When  Deputy   Secretary  of  Defense   Packard  was
before   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   March   26,
Senator   Fulbright   —who  has  been   magnificently  militant—
pressed  him  to  name  any  scientists  outside  the  Pentagon  who
had  been  consulted.   Packard  finally  came  up  with  one  name,
that   of   Prof.   Panofsky,   and   left   the   committee   with   the
impression  that  Panofsky  approved  the  Nixon  ABM  decision.
Dr.  Panofsky  is  a  leading  authority  on  radar  and  helped  to
develop  a  key  component   in  the  radars  which  are  a  part  of
the  ABM.   He  was  a  member  of  the  President's   Science  Ad-
visory  Committee  from   1959   to  1964.   In  that  period   deploy-
ment  of  an  anti-missile  system   was  twice   rejected,  once  by
Eisenhower  and  again  by Kennedy.
Unbeknownst  to  Packard  and  the  committee,  however,   Dr.
Panofsky  happened   to  be  in  the  hearing  room.   He  was  here
from  Stanford  to  testify  before  the  Joint  Atomic  Energy  Com-
mittee.   When  reporters  spotted  him  after  the  Packard  testi-
mony,  he  angrily  denied   that  he  had   approved   the   system
and  said  the  only  "consultation"  was  a  cursory   conversation
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  7, 1969
(Continued   From  Page   One)
during   an   accidental   meeting   with   Packard   at   an   airport.
Panofsky   asked   to   be  heard   by  the   committee.    When   he
appeared   two  days  later   he   said  he  had   never   participated
"in   any  advisory  capacity  to  any  branch  of  the  government"
on  the  Nixon-ABM.   He  told  the  committee  he   considered
its  deployment  "an  unwise  decision  from  many points  of  view:
engineering   judgment,   economy   and   stopping   of   the   arms
race.   And  this  last  goal,"  he  added,  "is  more  important  than
all  others."
The  New  SS-9   Bogeyman
Dr.  Panofsky  added  to  the  new  credibility  gap  on  a  more
complex   bit   of   Pentagon   propaganda—Laird's    Soviet   "first
strike"   scare.    Dr.   Panofsky   expressed   "considerable  skepti-
cism"  that  such  an  attack  could   be  mounted   by  the   Soviets
with  "any  confidence"  of  success.   He  called  it  "an  extremely
implausible  projection   of  our  available  intelligence,  including
that  concerning   the  SS-9."   The  SS-9  is  the  Pentagon's   latest
bogeyman  in  what  Fulbright  stigmatized  as  "the   technique  of
• fear."  When  Laird  "declassified"   this  supposed   secret   before
the   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee,   Fulbright   drew  a
laugh   from   the  crowded   hearing   room   when   he   observed
that  just  because  this  information   had  been  classified  did  not
prove  it  was  true.   He   might   have  added   that   just   because
it  was  classified  did  not   even  prove   it  was  a  secret.   If   the
Foreign   Relations   Committee   sends   over   to   the   Library  of
Congress  for  the  1968-69  edition  of  Jane's   All   The    World's
Aircraft   which  was  printed  in  London  last  year,  its  members
will   find   not   only  a   full   description  but  a  picture  of   the
SS-9  on  pages  540  and  541.   Jane's,  the  leading  authority  in
its  field  for  more  than  half  a  century,  said  this  Soviet   ICBM
was  first  shown  in  the  Moscow  parade  of  Nov.   7,  1967,   that
it was liquid-fuel,  that  it had  the NATO  code  name  of  "Scarp"
and  that  it  "had   been  referred  to  in  the  American  press  by
the  designation  SS-9."
Laird's   whopper   on   the   SS-9   turns   out  to  be   neither   a
secret  nor  true.   Symington  interjected  that  only  a  few  months
ago  the  Senate  Armed   Services  Committee  was  told  by  Dr.
Alain   Enthoven,   then   Assistant   Secretary   of   Defense    for
Systems  Analysis  "that  the  SS-9  was  built  for  a  second  strike
purpose."   The  testimony   appears   on  p.   119  in  Part   1  of
that  Committee's  special  hearings  on  the  Status  of  U.S.  Stra-
tegic  Power.   The  first  deletion  in  the  bottom  paragraph  obvi-
ously  refers  to  the  SS-9  and  the  second  to  the  smaller  SS-11.
A  New  Force  Against  Militarism
"America,  which through  most  of  its  history  has  had
a  tradition  of  shunning  militarization  except  under  the
necessities  of  large-scale  war,  is  now  inexorably  mov-
ing   toward  a  society  in  which  its   foreign  policy  and
even  its  everyday  life  is  dominated  by  the military."
—Dr.  Arthur  Larson,  head  of   USIA    under  Eisen-
hower,  summing   up  a  two-day  conference  in   Washing-
ton  March   29  on  the   Military    Budget   and   National
Priorities  in  which  14  Senators,  39  Congressmen   and
many  noted  scholars  participated.    It   called  for  a,  stop
to  ABM   and  MIRV,    immediate   strategic  arms   talks
with  the  USSR,   and  a  transitional  regime   in  Saigon
with  NLF   representation   to  preside  over  free   elections
and  the  creation  of  a  new  regime  "which  may   or  may
not  turn  out  to  be  to  our  liking."
MUST   READING:   The   New   American Militarism
by   Gen.  David   Shoup   in   The   Atlantic   Monthly   for
April.    The   former   Marine   Corps   Commandant    has
written  the  most  devastating  critique  of  its  kind  since
Marine   Gen.  Smedley   Butler   in   the   1930s  attacked
U.S.  imperialism in  Latin  America.
Dr.  Enthoven  said  the  Soviets  were  building  up  their   forces
"against  the  imagined  threat   of  a  U.S.  first  strike  on  their
weapons  and  their  cities,"  and  that  their  construction  of  more
ICBMs   and   a  submarine-launched   missile  system  (like  our
Polaris)  was  an  effort  to  increase  their  second  strike capability
so they could  maintain  deterrence.
Dr.   Enthoven   said  that   while   Soviet   offensive   forces   are
"larger   and  more  survivable"  than  our  intelligence   projected
in   1967   "they   are   much   less   effective   than   the    theoretical
Soviet   threat   against   which   we   have   been   designing    our
forces."  The  "gap"   is still  in our  favor.
Laird   is  peddling   the   wildest  kind  of  nonsense.    As   Dr.
Panofsky  testified, a Soviet  "first  strike"  to  be  successful  would
require  the  ability  to  launch  an  attack  so  huge  and  "so  highly
synchronized  that  it  would  at  the  same  time  [his  italics}  take
our  Polaris  fleet,  our  strategic  bombers,  and  our  Minuteman
force  out  of  action"   before  any  one  of  these  three  deterrent
forces  could  launch  a  retaliatory  attack.   Dr.  George  W.  Rath-
jens   spelled   out   this  virtual  impossibility   in   his   testimony
the  same  day.   He  said  this  would  require  all  of  the   follow-
ing  capabilities:   "very  large  numbers  of  warheads  with  ex-
treme   accuracy,"   "an   extraordinarily  effective  anti-submarine
warfare  capability,"   the  ability  to  counter  the  new  kind  of
How  The  Pentagon  Prepares  For  "Accelerated  Pacification"  Operations  At  Home,  Too
"The   Defense   Department  is   rushing   to   completion  a
multi-million  dollar  Army  Operations  Center  in  the  Penta-
gon  basement  to   serve  as   a  'war  room'  in  the   event  of
urban   riots   this   summer.   Construction  crews   have   been
working  since  January in  two  shifts,  and  sometimes around
the  clock  in  three  shifts,   to  complete  the  three-phase   job
of  renovating,  rewiring  and  remodelling a  250  by  400-foot
area  just  below  the  Pentagon's   Mall  entrance.
'The   Defense   Department  signed  a  contract  with  Balti-
more  Contractors,  Inc.,  Dec.  12  which  calls  for  the  comple-
tion  of  all  renovation  and  heavy  construction  work  by  June
30.   The  negotiated  cost-plus  fixed  fee  contract  is  for  $1.75
million,  but  Pentagon   sources  say  the  cost  could  go  up  to
$2   million.   The   second  stage  involves  the   installation  of
"communications   facilities,   situation   displays   and   other
equipment."  Its  cost  probably  will  go  well  into the millions.
"For  example,  the  room  will  be  equipped  with  an  'Ultra
Sonic  Motion  Detection  Device'  designed  to  sound  an  alarm
when  it  detects   'the  motion  of  a  person   in  the  protected
area  taking  one  step   in  one  second  followed  by  a  three-
second  pause.'   The  room  also  will  have  closed  circuit  TV
and  hundreds  of  telephone  and  radio  lines,  many  of  them
'secure  circuits'  to  prevent  wiretapping or  other  electronic
eavesdropping.  A  cast  bank  of  computers  will  be  housed  in
the  two-story  center  with  an  instant display of information
from  their  memory  tapes.
"The  center   is  located  adjacent  to  the   HQ  of   the  unit
established   last   summer  to   take  charge   of   all  military
planning  for  civil  disorders,  the  Directorate  of   Civil   Dis-
turbance  Planning  and  Operations   (DCDPO).   It  involves
representatives  of  the  Army, Navy,  Air  Force  and Marines.
The  size  of  the  Defense  Department's growing  commitment
to   such  domestic  crises   was   evidenced  by   the   disclosure
that   it  spent  more  than  $9.8  million  during  1968  in  this
category.
"Prior  to  the  Washington,  Baltimore  and  Chicago  riots,
Pentagon   strategists   were   talking   of   coping   with   five
concurrent   disorders  —   a   number   which  has   since   been
escalated  to  25  for  planning  purposes."
—Robert  Walters  in  the  Washington  Star,  March  84.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  April  7,  1969
air-to-surface   missiles  we  are  adding  to  our   bomber   forces
so  they  can  attack  the  Soviet  Union  from  beyond  its  defense
perimeter,  and  a  nationwide  anti-missile system  able  to  inter-
cept   any   retaliatory   missiles  which   might  have   escaped   its
first   strike.    "Clearly,"    Dr.   Rathjens  testified,    "the   Soviet
Union  has  none  of  these  capabilities at  present."   Neither,   he
might  have  added,   do  we.   The  basic  situation,  as  Dr.   En-
thoven  testified  last  year  to  Senate  Armed  Services,  "is  and  is
likely  to  remain  one  of  mutual  deterrence.   Neither  side  is
likely  to  be  able  to  launch  a  preemptive  attack  that  will  take
away  the  other   side's  ability  to  retaliate."    A  new  spiral  in
the  arms  race  would  only  raise  the  balance  of  terror  to  more
costly  and  destructive  levels.
II
With  the  Laird  team  in  charge  at  the  Pentagon,   it  is  diffi-
cult  to  believe  that  Nixon   is  serious  about  arms  negotiations.
When  Laird  told  the  Foreign  Relations  Committee  March  21
"there  is  no  question  about  it"—that  the  Soviets  were  "going
for   a  first-strike  capability"—he   was  doing   more   than  fly
recklessly   in   the   face  of   the   evidence.*    He   was   creating
attitudes  at  home  and  in  Moscow  more  conducive  to  a  new
confrontation  than  negotiation.    A  first-strike  capability  is  the
capability  to  destroy  the  other  side  in  a  surprise  attack.   The
American   people,   if  they  were  to  believe  Laird,  would  have
to  ask  themselves, how  can  we  negotiate  with people  so malev-
olent?    If   they  believe  Laird  and   look   at  the  evidence   that
neither  side  can  hope  to  achieve  such  a  capability,  then  they
must  conclude  that  the  Soviet  leaders  are  not  only  treacherous
but  are  too  lacking   in  rationality  to  make  negotiation   with
them  safe.
As  Seen  From   Moscow
The   prospect,  from   Moscow,   must   look   as  discouraging.
The   Soviet  leaders  know,  and  they  know   our  experts  know,
that   they  lag  far  behind  us  in  number  of  warheads  and  in
*  Those   who   drafted   his   formal   statement  that   day   were   much
more  careful.   This  is  how  they  phrased   it,  "With  improvements  in
the  accuracy  and  a  continued  increase  in  numbers,  the  Soviet  missile
force    could   gain   real    effectiveness    against   our   Minutemen."     He
should   have  been  asked,  how  big  an  increase  in   accuracy  and  num-
bers  would  this  require?   How   many  years  would  such  improvement
take?   And  what  is  meant  by  "real  effectiveness?"  To   knock  out  a
third  or  even  two-thirds  of  our  Minutemen  would  be  "real   effective-
ness"  but  it  would   still  be  far  from   a  first  strike  capability.
Wall  St.  Journal   Anti-Military,  Too
"Now   more  than  ever  there  is  need  for  the  civilian
vigilance   Mr.  Eisenhower   recommended.    By   its   size
alone   the   military   has   gained   profound   influence   on
the   economy,   and   perhaps   less   apparently,   on   the
formation  of  foreign  policy,  since  policy  often  depends
on  the  tools  available  to   implement   it.    A  large,  in-
flexible    military    organization    unchecked   by   strong
civilian   review   can   lead   only   to   a   self-perpetuating
drain   on   national   treasure,   a   demoralized   citizenry,
and  foreign  policies  dangerously  irrelevant  in  a  world
moving   rapidly   away   from   traditional   forms   of   war
and diplomacy."
—Wall  Street  Journal  editorial,  March  19.
technology.   When  they  hear  Laird  creating  such  false  alarms,
they  can hardly believe  we  are  serious about  arms  negotiations.
They  know  that  Laird  in  his  1962   book  "America's  Strategy
Gap"   argued  for  a  U.S.  first  strike  policy.   They   know  that
our  MIRV's  threaten  something  very  close  to  it  in  the  next
few  years  by  multiplying  the  warheads  of  Polaris  by  ten  and
those  of   Minuteman  by  three  while  we  are  expanding   the
power   of   our   bomber   force   manyfold   by   the   "stand-off"
missiles  of   SRAM   and   the   "multiple   re-entry"   vehicles  of
SCAD.    In  view  of  the  stupendous  buildup  of  U.S.   nuclear
power   underway,  it   is  they—not  we—who  must  fear   first-
strike.   How  negotiate  with  people  who  so  misrepresent  the
facts?   How  deal  with  men  so  slippery?   Deterrence   depends
on  a  cool  rationality.   Both  sides  have  always  feared  the  rise
on   the   other   side   of   fanatics  hot-headed   enough   to   take
deadly  chances.   If  lunatics  are  to  be  feared,  the  Russians may
reasonably   feel   there   is  more   reason   to   fear   them   in   the
Pentagon  than in  Moscow  or  Peking.
Laird's  first  strike  scare  contradicts  his  bargaining  position.
His  bargaining  position  is  that  the  Russians  must  pay  with
political   settlements   for   any  letup   in   the   arms  race.   This
assumes  that  they  are  in  more  danger  from  us  than  we  from
them,  that  it   is  we  who   can  negotiate  from   a  situation  of
strength.    Otherwise  we  could   hardly  exact  a  political   price
for  an  arms  agreement.   This  seems  to  be  the  White  House
position,   too.    Nixon's   men  phrase   it  more   discreetly   than
Laird's,  but  it  is  clear  enough  from  Nixon's  press  conferences
and—most   recently—from  his  March   18  letter   to  the   U.S.
delegation   to  the  Geneva  arms  talks.    "Regarding   the   ques-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
Nixon  Names  The Prosecutor  of  J.  Robert  Oppenheimer  to  the  Court  of  Appeals
Three  items  suggest  we  were  premature  in  deciding  that
Nixon  had  given  up  his  witch-hunt  proclivities  of  the    50s.
His  first  major  judicial  appointment  is  to  send  Roger  Robb,
the  AEC's   vindictive   prosecutor   of   Dr.  J.   Robert    Oppen-
heimer  to  the  U.S.   Court  of  Appeals.   Joseph  and  Stewart
Alsop  in  their  famous  "We  Accuse"  article  for  Harper's  in
1954  criticized  the  AEC  for  picking  as  its  chief  counsel  in
that  security   hearing   "a  man  best  known  as   the   lawyer
for  Senator  Joseph  R.  McCarthy's  chief  journalistic  incense-
swinger,   Fulton   Lewis,   Jr."    Professor   Harry   Kalven   of
Chicago  wrote  in  his  analysis  of  the  case  that   Robb    con-
ducted  himself  in  a  way  "that  would  be  barely  appropriate
in  a  prosecutor  in  a  murder  trial."   Robb  was  the  instru-
ment  of   the  Air  Force  vendetta  against  Oppenheimer.
The  second  item  is  an  interview  with   Attorney  General
Mitchell  by  Sarah  McClendon  (Washington  Star, March   24).
Mitchell   hailed  the  indictment  of  eight  Chicago  convention
demonstrators  as  "a  great  step  forward".   He  said  campus
riot  leaders  "make  it  easy  for  foreign  governments  to  make
dupes   of   us",    a  cryptic  non-sequitur   he  did  not   explain.
When  asked  if  he  thought  them  paid,  he  replied  "yes"   and
added,  "People  should  recall  this  is  the  way  Hitler  got  his
start.  He  started  working  in  academic  ranks  with  students."
A  novel  discovery.  Mitchell  is  rewriting  history  in  his   effort
to  put  a  Hitler  mustache  on  the  S.D.S.   Mitchell  also   com-
plained  that  he  was  having  "a terrible  time" because  college
presidents   and  professors   did  not   want   him  to  prosecute
students.   Mitchell  said  he  plans  to  put  the  records  of  "hard-
core"  student  leaders  before  the  Subversive  Activities   Con-
trol  Board  "to  determine  whether   they  are   Communists."
Few  student  leaders  would  care  to  be  found  dead  with  a
party  card.
This  brings  us  to  the  third  item  —  Nixon's  appointment
of   Otto  Otepka   to  a   $36,000  a  year  job  on  this  decayed
old  witch-hunt  agency.   Years  ago  Otepka  was  ousted   from
the  State  Department  for  carrying  its  files  to  Congressional
Red-hunters.   Nixon  in  his  campaign  promised  a  review  of
the  case.   When  Secretary  of  State  Rogers  refused  to  rein-
state,  Nixon  sent  Otepka  to  the  SACB.   With  Mitchell  and
Robb,  he  should  make  a  fine  team.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,  April  7, 1969
(Continued   From  Page  Three)
tion  of  talks  between  the  U.S. and  the  Soviet  Union  on  the
limitation  of  strategic  arms,"   Nixon  wrote,  "the U.S. hopes
that  the  international political  situation  will  evolve  in  a  way
which  will  permit  such  talks to  begin  in  the  near  future."  The
long  delayed  beginning  of  the  arms  talks  are  thus  made  to
depend—not   on  the  time  required  for  the  new  Administra-
tion  to  prepare   itself,  as  Secretary  Rogers  told  the   Foreign
Relations  Committee—but  on  "the international political situa-
tion."   The  Rogers  soft  sell  is  smoke-screen.   The  reality  is  to
be  seen  in  Laird,  and  Laird  speaks  for  Nixon,  though  with
less  finesse.  Laird  is  tricky  but  Nixon   is trickier.
Hardened   Terms  on  Vietnam
What   is  the   most   important  component   of  "the  interna-
tional   political  situation?"    The   Vietnamese  war.  I  believe
the  "secret  talks"  on  the  Vietnamese war  the  Nixon  Adminis-
tration   emphasizes   so   repeatedly   and   coyly  are   not   taking
place  with  Hanoi  or  NLF  but  with  the  Russians.   Over  and
over  again  we  have  read  in  the  dispatches  since  Nixon   took
over  that  his  Paris  negotiators  had  yet  to  receive  permission
to  resume  the  secret  talks which  had  proven  so  fruitful  under
Harriman.   Nixon   himself   has  always  said  that  the   key  to
peace   in   Vietnam  lay  in   Moscow,   i.e., in-a deal  with   the
Russians.   This  simplistic view  springs  directly  from  the  cold
war   demonology   Laird   is  reviving.   It   sees  the  Vietnamese
rebellion   and   civil   war   as  a  simple  Communist  plot  which
can  be  turned  off  from  a  Moscow  spigot.   I  believe  arms talks
are  being  held  up  until  the  spigot  is  shut  off.  That  may  take
a  long  time.
Laird   gave   the   game   away  on   Vietnam,   as   he   has   on
strategic  missiles.  The  terms  he  disclosed  in  his  presentation
March   27   to   the   House   Armed   Services  Committee  are  a
serious   obstacle   to   negotiations.    "The  basic   problem,"    he
said,  "remains  that  of  achieving  permanent   South  Vietnamese
governmental  control  over  the  country."   The  italics  are  ours.
"Permanent"  means  that  we  commit  ourselves  (1)   to  keep-
ing  the  Saigon   government   in  power   and   (2)   maintaining
the  division  of  Vietnam.   That  is  a  double  step  backward,  a
double  hardening  of  our  terms  in  the  direction  of  a  Korean
solution,  with  a  dictatorial  military regime  and  a constitutional
facade   in   South   Vietnam   like  that   we   installed   in   South
Korea.    In   a  Department   which   must   be  nameless  under   a
not-for-attribution   rule,   the   highest   permanent   civil   servant
Add  Blessings  of   The  Vietnam   War
"A  high   attack  rate  of  Vietnam   Rose—the   service-
man's   delicate   name   for   gonorrhoea   —   is    defeating
considerable   medical   efforts  to   contain   the   spread   of
venereal   disease.     A   report    to   be   published   by   the
World  Health  Organization  in  a  few  months  will  show
that  the  situation  is  rapidly  becoming  more  acute  than
ever  before  in  conditions  of  war.  In  one  unit  of  U.S.
troops,   it   is   estimated   that   about   700  out   of  1,000
men  are   infected   each   year.    Even   more   worrying   is
the   fact   that  gonorrhoea   has   developed  resistance   to
a   whole  range   of   anti-biotics.  The   more   highly   paid
prostitutes  who  associate  with  the  armed  forces,   dose
themselves     with    inadequate    amounts    of     penicillin.
They   thus  provide  weak  ammunition   against   the bac-
teria   and   only   succeed    in   'becoming    living    culture
media   for   the   selection    and   breeding    of   the    more
resistant  organisms'."
—London  Observer  (Mar. 23).
under   the   two  Nixon   appointees   indicated  in   an   otherwise
inane  briefing   for  visiting  editors  from   all  over  the  country
that   a  Korean   solution  was  still  the   objective  of   policy   in
that  Department, too.
I  regard  the  Thieu  interview offering  the  Viet  Cong  a  place
in  the  political life  of  South Vietnam if  they "abjure  violence"
as  part  of  a  campaign  to  tamp  down  the  American public's
impatience,  to  give  the  semblance  rather  than  the   reality  of
movement.    A   regime   which   has   been   jailing  hundreds  if
not  thousands  of  non-Communist  and  anti-Communist Budd-
hists,  which  outlaws  neutralism  and  pacifism  as  well  as Com-
munism,  which  permits  neither  freedom  of  press  nor   speech
despite  its  Constitution,  is hardly  likely  to  make  the  Viet  Cong
feel  it  would  be  safe  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  rely  on  its
promises.   Similar promises were  made  in  the  1954 settlement,
and   the   Viet   Minh   soon   landed   in   Diem's   concentration
camps.    Laird  speaks  darkly  of   a  military  alternative   if   ne-
gotiations  fail,  and  a  wider  war  is  a  real  possibility.   Nothing
fundamental  has  changed  in  Washington.    Nixon   is  carrying
on  where  Johnson   left  off, with  the  ABM, in  a  mountainous
military  budget,  and  in  the  desire  to  maintain  South  Vietnam
as  an  American  satellite.   And  he  is  trying  to  get  away  with
the  same  deceptions.   The  LBJ  brand  Johnson   loved  to  put
on  everyone  near  him  is plain  on  his  successors.   It  might  just
as  well  be  Lyndon  B.  Nixon  and  L.  B.  J.  Laird.
Index   For  1968  Now   Ready—Send   Long  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope  for   Free   Copy
Why  Hot  Save  Your  Copies  And  The  Index  In  a  Claw  Binder—There  Is  Much  In  The  Weekly  You  Won't  Find   Elsewhere
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed   $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time  of Torment   (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate  if
Please  renew   (or
Street
City
I.
4220  29th   St.
Zip
gift    announcement
enter)   a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  d
the   enclosed   $5:
State
F.  Stone's  Weekly                 v/es
N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.  20008
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
4220  29th  St., N. W.
Washington,  D.C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Second    Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington.    D. C.    Published   every   other   Monday   at    4220   29th   St.,  N.  W.,   Washington,   D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:   $5  in  the  U.S.;  J6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:   $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED