I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969sep09.pdf

============================================================

Sinking Deeper  Into  The  Vietnamese  Morass,  P.  2
Remember  When  LBJ  Called  Diem  The  Churchill  Of  Asia?
"When  asked  about Vietnam, Mr. Nixon  .  . .  called  Mr. Thien one of  the  four or five  best  political  leaders  in  the  world."
—From   Nixon's   on-the-record-bitt-not-for-direet-quotation  talk  with  reporters  cm.  the  Presidential  plane  between  Bang-
kok  and  New  Delhi July   SI.
L R  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly                 ~
VOL  XVII,  NO.  16
SEPTEMBER  9,  1969
101
  -'   WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Nixon  About  To  Abolish  Hunger  'Tor  All  Time"—Again
On  the  problems   of  the  poor,  as  on  everything  else,  the
Nixon   Administration   flounders   about   like   a   ship   with   a
broken   rudder.  In  its  first  months,  the  word   went  out   that
there  would   be  no  food  stamp   program.   Then  last  May  a
day  before  Secretary  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare   Finch
and  Secretary  of  Agriculture  Hardin   were  to  appear   before
the  Senate's   McGovern   Committee  on  Hunger,   £he Admin-
istration  decided  it  would  be  too  embarrassing  to  let  them  go
up  on  the  hill  empty-handed.  So Nixon  sent  Congress  a  food-
stamp  message.   The  rhetoric  had  a  high  caloric  content:
That  hunger  and  malnutrition  should  persist  in  a  land
such  as  our  (Nixon  said)  is  embarrassing  and  intolerable
.  .  .  Millions  of  Americans  are  simply  too  poor  to  feed
their  families  properly  .  .  .  Something like  the  very  honor
of  American democracy is  at  issue  .  .  .  The moment  is  at
hand  to  put  an  end  to  hunger  in  America  itself   for  all
time.
Still  Waiting  For  That  Moment
To  the  hungry  this  must  have  sounded   like  the  Prophet
Elijah  landing  with  a  mandate   from  Heaven.   But  the  pro-
gram  didn't  match  the  advertising  copy.  It  fit  Senator  Mon-
dale's  capsule  history  of  the  food  stamp  program.   He  said
the  government  "keeps  authorizing  dreams  and   appropriating
peanuts."   Though   "the  moment"  was  "at  hand"  to  "put  an
end  to  hunger  .  .  .  for  all  time,"  Congress  is  still  waiting
for  the  Administration  to  send  up  a  bill.  Even  the  niggardly
Senate  Agriculture  Committee  has  reported  out  a  food  stamp
bill  better  than  Nixon's  proposals,  and  it  will  be  among  the
main  items  of  business  when  the  Senate  reconvenes.   Senator
McGovern   has  a  bill  in  (with  31  co-sponsors)  which  would
expand  our  meagre  food  stamp  program  to  five  times  its  cur-
rent   size.  By  failing  to  send   Congress   a  specific   legislative
proposal,  the  White  House  is  delaying  action  in  food   stamps
altogether.
The   confusion  has  been   compounded   by  the   President's
new  message  on  welfare.  Two-thirds  of  all  persons  on  relief
are  in  dependent  families.  "For   dependent   families,"   Nixon
said  in  his  welfare  message,   "there  will  be  an  orderly  sub-
stitution   of   food   stamps  by  the   new   direct   monetary   pay-
ments."  The  food  stamp  program  he  outlined  last  May  would
apply   only  to  single   persons   or  childless   couples.   But,  ac-
cording  to  an  analysis  by  the  National   Council   on   Hunger
and  Nutrition,   if   food   stamps   are  eliminated   this  will   cut
welfare  standards  for  87%   of  those  in  dependent  families.
Nixon  said  his  program  would  be  "a  leap  upward  for  many
5
Numbers  Game  With  Poverty
The  Government is  playing  a  numbers  game  on pov-
erty.    The  Bureau  of   the   Census  Aug.  18  put  out  a
report  which  said  that  in  1968  about  1.6  million white
and   .8   million   colored   persons    "moved   above   the
poverty  level,"  leaving  25.4  million  below  it.   This  gen-
erated   optimistic  headlines,   "Number  of   Poor  Down
Two  Million."   But  for  those  who  recalled  the  annual
report  of  the  President's   Council of  Economic Advisers
last  January, this  looked  like  a  rise  of  3.4 million.  The
Council  reported  exuberantly  that  after  four  years  of
the  war  on  poverty  "Americans  are  increasingly  pros-
perous" and only  22 million still lived  below the poverty
line!   How  could  the  Census  Bureau now  call  25.4 mil-
lion  a 2  million drop?  The  answer  may  be  found  in  the
McGovern  committee  report  on hunger released  Aug. 7.
It  charged  that  political  considerations  were  coloring
poverty   statistics.   "In   1968,   for   example,"  it   said,
"Government   statisticians    estimated   there   were  be-
tween  22  and  27  million Americans living  in  poverty."
But  at  the  beginning  of  1969  "the  higher  of  these  two
figures   was  dropped  without  explanation"  and  the  22
million  used  as  the  official  estimate,   though  "few  ex-
perts"   thought   it   accurate.    The   McGovern   report
predicted  correctly  that  a  new  Census  Bureau  report
would  put  the  real  figure  between  25  and  26  million.
What  McGovern  could  not  foresee  was  that  this  would
be  made  to  look  like  a  2  million  drop  by  resurrecting
that  earlier  27  million  figure  and  deducting 25  million
from   it!    Even   in  statistics,   the   poor   can't   get   an
honest  count.
thousands  of  families  that  cannot  care  for  themselves."   This
would   be  true  only  for   those  living   in   Alabama,   Florida,
Mississippi,   South   Carolina  and  Texas.  Even  with  a  reason-
able  amount  of  state  supplementation,   four-fifths   of  those  in
dependent  families  will  end  up  with  less  to  eat under  Nixon's
latest  program  to  end  hunger.
The  principle  of  a  national  standard  and  the  principle  of
a  minimum welfare  guarantee  represent  steps  forward  but  the
ballyhoo*  had  best  be  muted  until  the  fine  print  is  available
in  a  legislative   proposal.  It   is  not  a  guaranteed  minimum
income.  "A  guaranteed  income,"  Nixon   said,  "would  under-
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
*U.S.   News   &  World   Report   called   the   proposals  "so
revolutionary"  as  to  create  unrest  in  Congress  while  News-
week  said  they  were  "so  sweeping  that  even  some  of   his
Republican  Cabinet  officers  were  left  gasping  for  conserva-
tive  breath."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  Sept.  9,1969
Nixon  Came  Back  With  Johnson's  Favorite Pipe  Dream .
NIXON'S  WELFARE   AND   REVENUE-SHARING   PLANS  were
based  on  the  expectation   he  brought   back  from  his  round-
the-world  trip  that  the  Vietnam  war  would  soon  be  over,  and
end  in  a  U.S.  political  victory,  releasing  funds  in  fiscal  1971
for  domestic  purposes.   Typical  of  the  glow  emanating   from
the  White  House  was  the  forecast  in  U.S.  News   (pre-dated
Aug.   18)   that   "the   Reds   are  ready-to   extend   the   'lull',
even  let  the  war  jade  away."    (Emphasis   in  original).    The
notion  that  the  enemy  would  some  day  fade  away was  long  a
favorite   Johnson-Rusk  pipe-dream.    They   must   be  still  ad-
dicted  to  it  in  Saigon   and   Bangkok,   the   stop-overs   where
Nixon   was  given  the  "Asian"  and  on-the-spot   U.S.   military
view   of   .the  war.    Three   nights   after   the   Nixon   welfare
message,  the  lull  ended  with  simultaneous   enemy  attacks  on
150  allied  installations.   If  the  enemy  offensive  continues  and
Nixon   delays  any  further  troop   replacements,   there  will  be
no  revenues  to  share  in  fiscal  1971  with  the  States  and  the
poor.   The  enemy  offensive  sharpens   the  No.   1  question  of
U.S.   policy—to   get   out   of   the   war   or   risk   more   social
conflict   and  inflation  at  home.
INFLATION  MAY PROVE  THE  VIET  CONG'S  most  formidable
ally.  A  Reuters dispatch  in  the  Washington  Post  Aug.  25  says
the  prices  of  sugar  and  rice  have  tripled   in   Saigon   in   the
past   two   weeks,   and   living   costs  have   risen   23%   in   31
months.   The  suffering  this  imposes  is  not  made  less  bearable
by  the  ostentatious  living  and  profits  of  the  Generals  and  .the
upper   crust.    Here   the   war's   inflation   takes   its  toll,   too.
Harry  E. Niles,  National  Chairman  of  the  Business  Executives
Move  For  Vietnam  Peace,   sent  the  President   a  letter  noting
that  the  consumers  price  index  has  risen  from  108.3  in  July,
1964,   just  before  the  Tonkin   Gulf   affair   to   128.2   in  July
of  this  year.  Niles  deplored  the  fact  that  there  has  been  "no
real  slow-down"   in  the  war  while  the  main   moves  to  stop
inflation   have  been  to  cut  funds   for  education,   health   and
civic  improvements.
FAR  FROM  EXTRICATING  ITSELF,  the  U.S.  is  sinking  deeper
into  the  Vietnamese  morass.   It  is  hard  to  avoid  the  conclu-
sion  that  the  hardened  U.S.  stance  at  the  Paris  peace  talks
and   the  choice  of  South  Vietnam's  highest   ranking   General
to  be  its  new  Prime  Minister  reflect  the   same  delusion  that
the  war   is  going  so  well  that  we  can  afford   to   be  tough.
Nixon  and  Thieu  are  living in  the  same  dream  world  that  led
As  Far   As  We  Can  Go?
Q.  So  you  take  issue  with  the  idea  that,  in  offering
a  mixed  electoral  commission  and  an  election  open  to
all,  we  have  gone  as  far  as  we  can  go,  to  use  Nixon's
words?
A.  I  don't  know  what's  been  offered.   I  don't  know
why  they  take  this  position.   It  never  occurred  to  me
that  the  Communists  would  enter   an  election  on  the
basis  of  the  winner taking  all.   There  has  to  be  some
prior  understanding  on  other  issues.   You've got  to  go
through  the  NLF's  10  points.  You  can't  pick  just  one
aspect  of  settlement  ...    I  don't  think  it's  a  reasonable
proposition   to   just   pick   one   thing   in   the   election,
particularly  as  the  [Saigon]  government  continues  to
put   people  in  jail.   THEY  GIVE  NO INDICATION
THAT  ANYBODY'S  GOING  TO  HAVE  ANY   FREE-
DOM   IN   SOUTH   VIETNAM   TO   HAVE   A   FREE
DISCUSSION  OR  FREE  CAMPAIGNING.  [Emphasis
added].
—Hedrick   Smith  interview   with  Averell    Harriman,,
New  York  Times  Magazine  Aug.  24.  Must  reading.
to  the  undoing  of  Johnson   and   Diem.    Premier  Tran  Van
Huong  got  into  trouble  by imposing  higher  taxes  on  imported
luxuries.   The  cabal  of  landlords,  Generals  and  profiteers  who
dominate  the   rigged   legislature  are  unwilling  to   make   the
slightest   sacrifices. even   to  save  their   own  skins.    The   new
government   flaunts   the  worst   possible  symbols.    The  three
top  men  are not  only Generals  but  Generals  who  were  trained
by   and   fought   for   the   French   against   their   own   people.
Khiem  is  a  master  of  intrigue,  who  has  steadily  worked  his
way  upward  by  knifing  every  chief  who  helped  his  rise.   The
best  account  of  his  career  is by John  E.  Woodruff  from  Saigon
in  the   Baltimore  Sun   (Aug.   24).   Khiem's   one   supposed
asset,  his  Buddhism,  is  also  in  doubt.   If  his  luck  and  pattern
hold,  Khiem  may  next  oust  Thieu.   Saigon  needed  a  demo-
cratic  facade.   Instead  it  has  put  on  its  ugliest—and   truest—
face.    This   is  a  victory  not   just  for   hawks  but   for   social
elements   so  blind  their  doom  is  inevitable.   But  we  are  to
foot  the  bill.
THE  TIE  VOTE  BY  WHICH  THE   ATTACK  ON   THE   ABM
failed  will  raise  the  curtain  on  the  most  detailed   take-apart
of   the   military  budget   the   country  has   ever   seen.    When
Congress   reconvenes,   the  MIRV,  the  new  manned   bomber,
the  Navy's  carrier  planes  and  cargo  planes  for  Pax  Americana
How  Hunger  Stunts  The  Children  Of  The  Poor  In  Infancy  — And  Its  Social  Cost
"Malnutrition  and  undernourishment  among  poor Amer-
ican  children  can  and  does  result  in  —  apathy, listlessness,
and  loss  of  energy  and  ability  to  concentrate,  slowness  of
comprehension,   inattention,  restlessness,   behavioral  prob-
lems,  and retarded  learning ...    In fact  undernutrition may
be  the  primary  cause of  diminished intellectual achievement
among  poor  American  children.  At  least  one  study  in  this
country,  in  which  other  economic  and  social  factors  were
controlled,   has   established   a   direct   correlation  between
undernutrition  in  infancy  and  stunted  physical   and  mental
development  in  preschool years.*
"That  severe  malnutrition  of  the  kind  found  in  develop-
ing  countries results  in  permanent brain damage to  children
who  are  retarded  for  life  has  been  scientifically substanti-
ated.   More  study  is  needed  to  determine  the  exact  relation-
ship  between malnutrition and  irreversible  brain damage  in
this  country,  but  .  .  .  the  clear  evidence  that malnutrition
is  one  major  factor  in  retarded  intellectual  development  is
certainly   enough  to   make  action  imperative.   Immediate
measures  must be  undertaken to  assure  that  every  pregnant
woman,   every   infant,   every   preschool   child,   and   every
school  child  who  risks  suffering  from  hunger  or  malnutri-
tion  receives  an  adequate, nutritious  diet.
"The  economic  and  social  costs  to  our  society — the  loss
of  productivity  and  work  capacity,  the  costs  of  disease  and
mortality  ...    in  short,  the  costs  of  blighted  lives  are  also
the inevitable results  of  hunger and malnutrition. . . .  These
costs  can  be calculated in  economic  terms  .  .  .  The Bureau
of   the  Budget  has  already   estimated,   preliminarily,   that
for  every  dollar  we  save  by  failing  to  eliminate  hunger
and  malnutrition it  costs  our  nation  $3.30."
—From   the  Senate's   (McGovern)   Committee  report   an
The  Food  Gap:  Hunger  and  Malnutrition  in  the  C7.S.
*"They  were  shorter,  weighed  less  and  had  small  heads.
.  . .  Their  IQs were  lower  than  the  control  children  and  it
was  found  that  their  neurological  and  intellectual   develop-
ment  also  correlated  with  the  duration  of  their  undernutri-
tion  in  infancy"—From  footnote  p.  15  of  the  report.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly, Sept.  9,  1969
A  Change of  One  Vote  Could  Still  Block  The  ABM
purposes   will  all  be  targets.   The   announcement   from   the
summer  White  House  that  even  the  end  of  the  Vietnam  war
will  free  little  money  for  domestic  purposes   will  only  pro-
voke  sharper   onslaught  on  Pentagon   spending.   A   foretaste
was  Senator  Proxmire's  reaction  to  Secretary  Laird's  announce-
ment  that  he  was  cutting  $3  billion  from  the   1970   budget
as  a  result   of  warnings   from   Mahon  in  the   House   that  it
might  cut  $5  billion.   Proxmire,  whose  Joint  Economic  Com-
mittee  hearings  have  opened  up  a  mine  of  information  on
the  hidden   realities  of   the   military  budget,   called   Laird's
cuts  "tokenism"  and  derided  Laird's  warnings  that  they  would
endanger  U.S.  defenses.   Proxmire  said  the  $2  billion  over-
run  on  the  C-5A plan  would  pay  personnel  costs  for  200,000
combat  troops  for  an  entire  year;  that  Admiral  Rickover  told
Proxmire's  committee  $2  billion  could  be  saved  by a  uniform
accounting  system  at  the  Pentagon;   and  that  interviews  with
Defense  Department  experts  last  year  by Congressional   Quart-
erly  showed  that  $10  billion  could  be  saved  without  harming
defenses.   The  ABM  itself  may  come  under  fire  again  when
the   appropriation   comes   up   for   action.   A   change   of   one
vote  could  block  it.
ONE  ASPECT  OF  THAT  "CONTINGENCY  PLAN" with  Thai-
land  has  not  yet  been  explored.   The  "plan"  was  drawn  up
in   1965.    That  was  the  year  Thailand   allowed   the  U.S.   to
begin  bombing  North  Vietnam  from  Thai  bases.   That  was,
by  any  normal  standard,   an  act  of  war  on  Thailand's  part
and  invited  retaliation.   Imagine  what  we would  do  if  Canada
lent  its  air  fields  for  enemy  bomber  attacks  on  the  U.S.!    If
the  Vietnam  war  were  not  so  one-sided  and  North  Vietnam
had  a real  air  force,  those  Thai  bases would  have  been  blasted
immediately.   Or  if  the  Soviet  Union  or  China  had  intervened
with  planes  or  troops,  one  of  their  first  targets  would   have
been  the  Thai   bases  from  which  North  Vietnam  was  being
bombed.   This  is  what  Thailand   risked  and  this  is  why  we
had  to  promise  aid  against  external  "aggression"  and  to  nail
down  the  promises   in  a  secret  agreement.    P.S.  Those  who
wondered  what  Nixon  was  talking  about  in  Bangkok  when
he  stressed  our  common  traditions  with  Thailand—what   tra-
ditions  could  there  be  in  common  between  an  ancient   Ori-
ental  despotism   and  a  modern  democracy?—now  have  their
answer.   Both  take  grave  risks  of  war  without  letting  their
people  know  what  they  are  doing.
Poland's  Stalinists  At  Work  and  Play
The  writers  took  action  against  censorship  from  the
celebrated  'Letter  of  The  34'  through  the  'Kolakowski
affair
1
  when 28 writers left  the  party  in  protest  against
his   expulsion   to   the   extraordinary  meeting   of   the
Writers'  Union  when  its  most  respected  members sup-
ported  the  Czechoslovak  struggle.   The  turning   point
was  the  Israeli-Arab  war.   Of  course  this  was  only  a
pretext.    In  his   speech  about  the   'fifth   column',  Mr.
Gomulka  provided the  new  [neo-Stalinist]  team  with a
weapon.  The  anti-Semitic  campaign that  -followed  took
various  forms.   One  of  the  most  bizarre  was  the   at-
tempts  by  the   new  team,  searching  the   countryside
for  birth  certificates,  to  discover  proof  of  the  Jewish
extraction  of  their  opponents.   When  the  hunted  Jews
began  to  leave  Poland, the  liberal  intellectuals  made  a
point  of  coming  to  the  station  to  say  farewell.   The
security  police  took  photographs  of  these  'demonstra-
tors'  and I  remember a  particularly disgusting  incident
when  a  drunken  litterateur  from  the  new  team  who
came  to  see  who  among  the  writers  had  the  nerve  to
accompany   his  Jewish  friends  to  the  station,   asked,
"Where  is  the  train to Treblinka?"
—Abridged   from,  interviews  in  The  Times   (London)
Aug.  21-2 with  Alicja  Lisiecka,  a  leading Polish  liter-
ary  critic, on why  she like  the Soviet  novelist Kuznetsov
fled  to  the  West.   Mrs.  Lisiecka  said  many  of  Poland's
foremost  writers  have  been  forbidden   to  publish.   Her
story  and  the  degeneration of  the  once  liberal Gomulka
regime deserve wider  attention.
THE    HAYNSWORTH    APPOINTMENT   To    THE    SUPREME
COURT  is a triple  affront—to the  nation's  blacks,  to  the  labor
movement   and   to  those  who'  do  not  want   another   Fortas
affair   on  the   Supreme  Court.   Like  Fortas,  Haynsworth  has
already  shown  a  lack  of  candor  about  his  financial  ties  and
a  less than  scrupulous  regard  for  the  Judicial  Canon  of  Ethics.
Thanks  to  William   Eaton  of  the   Chicago  Daily  News  and
the  Mankiewicz-Braden   column,  we  now  know  that  Hayns-
worth  hid  the  full  truth  about  his  half  million  dollar  hold-
ings  in  Carolina   Vend-a-Matic  when   the  Deering   Milliken
case,  with  which  it  did   business,  was  before  the  Court  of
Appeals.   The  White  House  helped   to  hide  the  facts.   We
hope  they  will  be  aired  in  the  Senate  and  the  appointment
rejected.   It  would  be  a  poor  way  to  get  law  and  order  by
undermining   respect  for  our  highest  court.
An  Urgent  Step  To  Slow  Up  The  Militarization  Of  Our Intellectual  Resources
The  most  significant cut  achieved  in  Pentagon   spending
on  the  floor  of  the  Senate  before  the  summer  recess  was
the  $45.6  million  slash  in  research  funds.   This  was  voted
49-44  on  Aug.  12 and represented  a  victory  for  a  campaign
Senator  Fulbright  began  last  year  to  reduce  military  in-
fluence  over  universities   at   home  and  abroad.   We   urge
those   concerned   over   the   slow   militarization   of   higher
education  to  begin  a  campaign now  for  comparable  action
in  the  House,  where the  military  authorization  bill  has  yet
to  be reported  out.
Senator   Fulbright  opened  the  debate   by  quoting  from
the  testimony  of  Admiral  Rickover  last  year  in  the  hear-
ings  held  by  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  Committee  into
the  research  activities   of  the  Defense  Department.    "The
DOD,"  tiie  maverick  Admiral  testified,   "has  been  able  to
involve  itself   in  research   having  only  the  remotest  rele-
vance  to  the  problems  encountered  by  the  armed  services
— matters   at  no  previous  time  nor  anywhere  else  in  the
world   deemed  to  lie   within  the  province  of   the   defense
function  — just  because  it  has  the  money."
A  striking  example  was  furnished  by  Senator  Proxmire.
He  said  that  though  the  U.S.  has  established  a  National
Science   Foundation   for   basic   and   applied   research,   the
Pentagon  gets  6  to  7  times  as  much  in  this  same  area.   In
1969  NSF  had  $280  million  while  the  Pentagon  had  $1,658
million   to   hand  out   for   basic   research.   The   effect,   as
Senator  Case  of  New  Jersey  said,  was  to  give  the  military
a  growing  influence  over the  academic  community.  He  was
especially   concerned,  as  was  Senator  Fulbright,  about  the
so-called   "behavioral   sciences"   through  which   some  day
the   military   might   learn   to   manipulate  or  brain-wash
opinion  for its  own purposes.
Fulbright's  successful  amendment was  aimed  in  particu-
lar   at   the   "think   tanks"   like   Rand,   Hudson  and  other
"Institutes" which provide lush  employment for  intellecnals
on  the  military  gravy-train.- Fulbright  said  "the  thinking
permeating   much  of  this   research  is  likely  to  lead  to  a
larger   and  larger  military  establishment   and  more  Viet-
nams."    Don't  let   the  military   restore   these   cuts  in  the
House.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly, Sept.  9,1969
Few  On  Welfare  Employable,  So "Workfare"  Is  Nonsense
(Continued  from  Page  One)
mine  the  incentive  to  work."  Every  welfare  recipient  under
Nixon's  plan   "must   also  accept   work  or  training   provided
suitable  jobs  are  available,  either  locally  or  at  some  distance
if  transportation  is provided."  At  what  rate  of  pay  and  under
what  conditions  Nixon  has  yet  to  answer.
New  Federalism  and  Old  Oppression
Nixon's New  Federalism,  in  turning  over  employment train-
ing  to  the  States,  threatens  to  reinforce  old  forms  of  oppres-
sion.  In   the  related  field  of   vocational   training,  the  States
have  made  a  poor  record.  In  welfare  administration,  most  of
the  States  and  localities  have  been  unsympathetic  to  the  poor,
especially  the  minorities.  "If   you  feed   'em,"   one  Southern
county  commissioner  told  a  McGovern  committee  staff  mem-
ber,  "they  won't  work."  Would  such   officials   force   welfare
recipients  to  take  substandard jobs  at  substandard  wages  under
threat  of  removal  from  the  welfare  rolls?  Could  this  be  used
to  undermine  wage  rates?  To  break  strikes,  particularly  those
pitiful  stirrings  of  the  unskilled  and  the  unorganized  at  the
rural  level?
Nixon  has  often  said  it  was  dangerous  to  raise  hopes  that
could   not   be   fulfilled.   His   welfare  program   violates   this
favorite  precept.  Both  the  poor  and  the  well-to-do  taxpayer
are  in  for  disillusionment.  He  promised  "a  complete   replace-
ment"   of  the  present   welfare  system  with   its   humiliations
but  .the minimums he  proposes  are  so  low  that  the  State  wel-
fare  systems,  snoopers   and  all,  must  remain  in  existence  to
supplement  them.  "A  measure  of  'the  greatness  of  a  powerful
nation,"   he  grandiloquently  began   his   welfare   message   to
Congress,  "is  the  character  of  the  life  it  creates  for  those  who
are  powerless  to  make  ends  meet."  How  could  he  then  with-
out  blushing  offer  a  $65  a  month  minimum  to  the  aged,  the
blind  and  the  disabled ? And  even  less  than  that  to  dependent
families—$500,   or  little  more  than  $40  a  month,   for   each
adult;  $300,  or  $25  a  month,  for  each  child?  In  what  hovel
without  running  water  can  you feed,  clothe  and  house  a fam-
ily  on  that  income  level?
The  $1600  minimum  is  based  ultimately  on  the   Agricul-
ture  Department's  "economy"   diet  of  $1200  a  year  (see  box
this  page)   for  a  family  of  four.  Any  mother  who  can  per-
This   Issue  Went  To
We'll  Be  Clod  to  Send  A  Free  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A
How  They  Fix  The  Poverty  Line
The  government now estimates  there  are  25.4  million
Americans   living   below   the   poverty   line.    The  Mc-
Govern  hunger   report  shows  that  this  line- has   been
placed  unrealistically low.  The poverty line  is  based  on
the  Department  of  Agriculture's  "economy"  food  plan
for  a  family  of  four.  This  is  then  multiplied —  again
unrealistically  —  by  three  (instead  of  four)  to  allow
for   all  other   expenses.   The  latest   estimate   by   the
Census  Bureau  places  this  at  $3700  a  year.   But  the
Department of  Agriculture itself  warned last  year  that
this   "economy"  food  budget  was  only  suggested   for
"emergency"  use.   "The  cost  of  this  plan," it  said,  "is
not  a  reasonable  measure  of  basic  money  needs  for  a
good  diet."  It  suggested  that  welfare  agencies  use  the
USDA  Low-Cost  Food  Plan  "which  costs  about  25%
more."   This  would  now  be  about  $1541  a  year   and
bring  the  poverty  line  for  a  family  of  four  up to  $4600
a   year.   The   McGovern   report   says   Social    Security
estimates  that  about  38  million  Americans  are  below
that  line.  The  25.4  million  of  the  Census  Bureau  esti- •
mate  are  very   poor  indeed.   Yet  almost  half   of   the
country's   blacks  live   below   this   $3700   poverty  line
($3,886  is  their  median  family  income).   The   Census
Bureau  also  discloses  that   half   the   "gainfully"   em-
ployed   in   three   occupations  earn   far   less:   service
workers  ($3,660), farm  laborers  ($854 —  yes,  per  year)
and  other  laborers,  except  in  mines   ($2,652).   These
lower  income  regions  are  the  kingdom of  hunger.
form   the  miracles  of  cooking,   buying  and   storage  this  re-
quires  should  have  no  trouble  obtaining  an  executive  job  in
industry.  The  biggest   disappointment   is  invited  by  Nixon's
promise  in  Madison  Avenue  prose  to  replace   welfare   with
"workfare."   The  AFL-CIO's  George  Meany,  in  an  unusually
sharp  criticism  of  Nixon's   plan,  pointed   out  that  "contrary
to  popular  conception,  the  nation's  welfare  rolls  today   cover
fewer  than   100,000   able-bodied  men."   Even  with  far   more
day-care,  it  is  doubtful  that  enough  working  mothers  can  be
drawn  off  relief  to  make  more  than  a  5%  dent  in  the  relief
rolls   (500,000   off  10,000,000).  As  for  his  aid  to   working
fathers  paid  below  the  poverty  level,  a  minimum  wage  of  $2
an  hour  for  a  40-hour  week  would bring  .them  out  of  poverty
faster.   Why   should   the  taxpayer  subsidize  the   substandard
employer?
Press  August  26
Friend —  Send A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City                                       Zip                State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  D
Please  renew  (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City  ,
Zip                State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                    9/9/69
4420  29th  St.  N. W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
/  E  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published   Bi-WeeMy
4420   29th   St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D.C.   20008
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.  2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington, D.C.  Published  every other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W.,  Washington, D.C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada;
$10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED