I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969feb24.pdf

============================================================

The  Only  Way   To  Stop  Plane Hi-Jacking,  P.  3
Who  Else  Builds  Doves  With  Multiple  Heads  and  Penetration   Devices?
"I  consider  the  Department of  Defense  to  be  a  Department of  Peace."
—President  Nixon  at  press  conference,  Feb. 6
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi- Weekly                    *^Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL.    XVII,  NO.  4
FEBRUARY  24,  1969
»
101
       WASHINGTON, D. C.
20  CENTS
Who's  Running  Foreign  Policy  — Nixon  or  Laird?
On  Face  The  Nation   Feb.  9  and  the  Today  show  Feb.  13
Secretary   Laird   managed  completely  to   distort   the   realities
of   the  arms  race.   The   Secretary  never  lets  an  occasion  pass
to  note  that  his  role  has  changed  since  he  went  from   the
Republican   minority   on   the   House   Appropriations   defense
subcommittee  to  the  top  job  at  the  Pentagon.   His  TV   ap-
pearances  show  that  his  role  hasn't  changed  at  all.   He  was  a
mouthpiece   for   the  Joint  Chiefs   of   Staff   and   the   military-
industrial  complex  on  the  Hill  and  he  remains  their  mouth-
piece,   vastly   amplified,   as   Secretary   of   Defense.    What   is
more,  he   talks  as  if   he  were  running  U.S.   foreign   policy.
Where  Nixon  is  cautious  and   Secretary  of   State  Rogers  has
been  silent,  Laird  is  off  and  running  hard  in  a  campaign  to
step  up   U.S.  arms  expenditure.   Where   Nixon   has  shifted
from   "superiority"  to   "sufficiency"   to   make  Moscow   more
receptive,  Laird  has  made clear  his  preference  for  the  abrasive
term.   Where  Nixon  has  suggested  parallel  progress  on  mis-
siles  and  political  issues, Laird  on  Face  The  Nation  said  there
must  be  "progress,  not  only  in  Paris  but  also  in  the   Middle
East"   before    missile   talks   can  be  held.    Where   the   Nixon
Administration  has  ordered  a  complete  review  of  the  military
budget,  Laird  is jumping the  gun  to  plug  for  the anti-ballistic
missile.    Where   Nixon    by   sending   the    Non-Proliferation
Pact  to  the  Senate  has   taken   a  first  step   toward   relaxation
of   tension,  Laird  is  beating  Goldwater-style  alarms.    Nixon
is   soon   going   to   have   to   decide   whether   he   or   Laird   is
running  the  show.
Beyond  Mao's  Wildest  Dreams
The  most  striking  divergence  between  them  is  in  the  treat-
ment  of  the  supposed  Chinese  missile  threat.   The  President
said  Feb.  7  he  did  not  "buy  the  assumption"  that  the  Sentinel
ABM  was  simply  to  protect  us  from  attack  by  China.    But
two   days  later  Laird   was  saying  the   opposite  and  on   the
Today   show  he  twice  said  we  had  to  build  'the  Sentinel  be-
cause  "we  do  not  want  to  become  hostage  of  the   Chinese."
The   overwrought  phrase  conjured  up   pictures  of  a  heroine
in  an  old   movie  melodrama  held   by  Chinese  white  slavers.
Laird  said  he  thought  the  Chinese  might  fire  their  first  ICBM
within  -the next  18  months  "and   they  might   [he  didn't  say
when]  develop  some  18  to  20  of  these  missiles."    How  will
a  nation  with  18  to  20  missiles  hold  hostage  a  nation  which
can   deliver   (latest   Pentagon   figures)   4200   warheads?    By
slipping  fissionable  marijuana'into our  chop  suey?
Laird  said  on  the  Today   show  that  McNamara's  "appraisal
of   that   [Chinese]   situation   is   correct",   as   if    McNamara
agreed  with  this  nightmare.   McNamara   in  his  final  defense
posture  statement  a  year  ago  noted   that  the  Chinese   ICBM
program   was  lagging,   said   that   China   would   not   have   a
"significant  number"   of  ICBM's  until  the  mid-70s  and  de-
clared  that  these  would  be  rather   slow  and  unreliable.   Less
Eternal  Vigilance  Dept
All   The  Way  Back  To  Those  Pinkoes
Who  First  Made  Cannibalism
A  Dirty  Word
"Subversion   in   one   form   or   another  is   as   old   as
history."
—Rep.  Richard   Ichord   (D.  Mo)  pleading  with  the
House   Rules   Committee   Feb.  4   to  continue   the   Un-
American   Activities  Committee,   though  with  its  name
changed   to  the  Committee   on  Internal   Security.    The
House  was  expected  to  vote  the  change  as  we  went  to
press.
than   a   month   ago,   Secretary   Clifford    in   his   last   defense
posture  statement  reported   continued   Chinese  delay  not  only
in  deploying  an  ICBM  but  even  intermediate range  missiles.
He  said  this  indicated  "serious  problems",   perhaps  due  to  the
Cultural  Revolution.   The  Pentagon's   experts  two  years  ago
expected  the  first  Chinese  ICBM  shot  before  the  end  of   1967.
Laird  will  have  to  scrape  up  a  pretty  fervent  Maoist  to  find
someone  ready  to  believe  the  U.S.  in  danger  of   being   held
hostage by China.
Laird's  discussion  of  the  relative  anti-missile  spending   of
the   U.S.   and   the   USSR   was  equally   fantastic.    Laird   was
asked  on  Face  The  Nation,   "Can  you  tell  us  what  the  Rus-
sians'   anti-ballistic  missile  situation   is?    How   many  cities?
How  fast  a  deployment?  Has  it  been  speeded   up  or  slowed
down?   How  do  they  compare?"   The   answer,   as   provided
less  than  a  month  ago  by  Clifford's  last  posture  statement,  is
that   construction  has   been   curtailed   on   the   ABM   around
Moscow,  the  only  place  where  the  Russians  began   to  build
one.   "It   is  the   consensus   of   the   intelligence  community,"
Clifford   reported,   that  this  GALOSH   system,  as  it  is  called,
"could   provide   only  a  limited  defense  of   the  Moscow   area
and  could   be  seriously  degraded   by  currently  proposed   U.S.
weapons  systems.".  Indeed  this  Russian  ABM,  Clifford   said,
"resembles   in  certain   important   respects   the  Nike-Zeus   sys-
tem  which  we  abandoned   years  ago   because   of   its   limited
effectiveness."   It  is, in  other  words,  obsolete.
Instead  of  giving  an  honest  answer,  Laird  plunged   into  a
numbers  game.    He  said   "this  past  year  the   Russians  have
spent   $4  for   every  $1  that  we  have  spent   on  anti-strategic
weapons  systems."   He  then  cut  .this  down  to  $3.70  and  four
days  later  on  the  Today  show  made  it  $3-50  to  $1.   By using
the  term  "anti-strategic  weapons   systems,"  Laird  could   lump
Russian  anti-bomber  with  anti-missile  defenses.    The   excuse
always  adduced  in our  appropriations  hearings  for  maintaining
so  many  intercontinental  bombers   (646   as  compared  with  the
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  February  24, 1969
NIXON'S  CHOICE  As   DIRECTOR  of   the   U.S.  Arms  Control
and   Disarmament    Agency   is   no   flaming   crusader    for   dis-
armament.  Gerard  C.  Smith  was  right  hand  man  to  Dulles  on
arms  negotiations  and   seems   to  have   shared   his   apocalyptic
cold  war  views.   Under  Rusk,  Smith  was  one  of  the  architects
of  that  monstrosity,  the  Multi-Lateral  Nuclear   Force.   When
Fulbright   tried   to   question    Smith    about   the   MLF   at   his
confirmation   hearing,  Smith  dismissed   it   as  "a   dead    issue."
But   a   week   later   in   the   February   Interplay,     which    Smith
publishes,  there  appeared   an  article by Smith  suggesting  "some
kind  of  joint  European  nuclear  force,"   a  variant  of  the   MLF.
During  the   1961   Berlin  crisis  Smith  proposed  that  the   U.S.
and  its  allies  answer  any  Berlin  blockade  with  a  sea  blockade
of  the  Soviet  Union  at  the  Turkish  and  Danish  straits, though
he  wrote  this  might  "trigger  off  general   war."    The  text  may
be  found  in  the  confirmation  hearing.   It  shows  that  in    1961
he   thought   the   search   for   world   law   "illusory"   as  long  as
there  were  "both  communist   and   free   systems."    But  in   last
November's    issue  of   his  magazine,   Smith   said   "a   return   to
the   cold   war   would   have  nothing   in   it   for   anyone,"   and
termed  "arms  control"  in  the  vital  interests  of  the  U.S.   and
the  world.
IT   WAS   A    PLEASURE   To     LIVE   To    SEE  the   day   when
Richard   Nixon   would    turn   his   back   on   witch-hunting,   as
he  did   at  his  last   press   conference   when   asked   whether   he
knew   the   charges   made  against   Charles   W.   Yost  at  Yost's
confirmation   hearing  before   Senate  Foreign  Relations.   These
came   from    a   spokesman   for   something   called   the   Liberty
Lobby,   and   sounded   as  if   they  had   been   fished  out   of   the
House  Un-American   Activities  Committee  files,  as  they  prob-
ably  were.    "The   relationship  between   Yost  and  Hiss  was  so
close,"   the   League's   spokesman    testified   before    Fulbright
cut  him  off  in  disgust,   "that  Yost  was  entertained   in  Hiss's
apartment."    The  Hiss  case  started  Nixon  on  the  road   to  the
Presidency.   Now,   in  defending  Yost's  loyalty  and   judgment,
and   in   saying   that   he   was   interested    "in   his   capability   to
handle   the  problems  of   the   future   and   not   events  that  oc-
curred   over  20  years  ago,"   Nixon  seemed  to  be  burying   that
part  of  his  own  past  as  well  as  Yost's.
THOUGH   NIXON   ABOLISHED   PARTISANSHIP   IN   THE   Post
Office,   he   is  maintaining  it  in  the  District  of   Columbia   City
Council.    Blacks   here   are   generally   disappointed    with    the
three  men  he  has  named.   The  new  chairman,  Gilbert  Hahn,
Jr.,  whose  family  owns  the  largest  shoe  store  chain  in  the  area,
Startling   Admissions   in  The  Pueblo  Affair
"The   accuracy   of    virtually    all   the    USS    Pueblo's
navigation   equipment   has   been  challenged   by   one   of
the  five  admirals conducting the  Navy  court  of  inquiry
into  the  North  Korean seizure  of  the  intelligence ship.
The  challenge  opens  to   serious   question  for   the  first
time  the  U.S.  insistence  that  the  vessel   never  violated
the   territorial   waters   claimed   by   North   Korea.    Lt.
Edward   K.  Murphy,  executive  officer   and  navigator  of
the  ship,  acknowledged yesterday  that  he  had  no  truly
accurate   navigational  aids   to   rely   on   —   with   the
exception  of  radar  and  use  of  radar  was  restricted  by
the   need   to   maintain   electrical  silence   while  on   the
intelligence   mission.    Under   questioning   from   Rear
Adm.   Edward   K.  Grimm,   Murphy  said   he   most   fre-
quently    relied   on    LOKAN,    an    instrument   he    said
resulted  in  "a  fairly  constant  error  of  about  5  nautical
miles."   The   Pueblo   had  charts   of   the   North   Korean
coast,  but  they  were  prepared  from  1950  to  1953  and
had  'obvious  errors'  which  made  it  difficult  to determine
the   ship's   position.   Murphy  described  as   'a  fabrica-
tion'   the   chart   by   the   North   Koreans   which  alleged
17   intrusions   into   territorial  waters   by   the    Pueblo.
But  he  disclosed  that  11  of  the  alleged  intrusions  were
taken   directly  from   Pueblo's   LORAN  log   book.    The
LORAN  readings  were  known  to  be  inaccurate by  the
Pueblo  crew  but  the  North  Koreans  could  not  be  con-
vinced   of    the   error   made   by   the   detection   device,
Murphy  said."
—Abridged   from   a  dispatch   by  Robert   Walters   in
the  Washington  Star  Feb.   5,  the  only   account  we  saw
which  covered   these  crucial  revelations.
is  a  conservative  Republican  who  campaigned   for  Nixon  last
year   and  was  for   Goldwater   in   1964.     He   opposed   the  re-
appointment    of   Walter   Washington,    the   District's   White
House-appointed   black  mayor.   To  replace  the  liberal   Republi-
can  Nevius   on   the   Council,   a   white  whom   the   blacks   re-
spected,   Nixon   chose   an   active   Negro   Republican    Baptist
pastor  little  in  tune  with   majority  black   sentiment.    Nixon's
other,   choice,    also   unpopular   with   militants,   was   Sterling
Tucker  of  the  National   Urban   League  who  replaces   the   Rev.
Walter   E.   Fauntroy,   a   close   associate   of   the   Rev.   Martin
Luther   King.   That,   too,   is  a  shift   to  the  right  and   to  an
unrepresentative  City  Council.
STUDENTS   OF    THE    ARMS    RACKET   may   now    read    for
U.S.  Scientists   Rebut  Laird's  Argument   That   Sentinel   Would  Be   A  Bargaining   Card
"Now  as  far  as  the  ABM  is  concerned,  we  have  an  oppor-
tunity  I  think  within  the  not  too  far  distant  future  to  move
into  talks  with  the  Soviet  Union  on  offensive  and  defensive
missile   systems.    And   I   do  not   want   to   be  in   a  position
when  we  go  into  those  talks,  if  we  do,  with  one  hand  tied
behind   our  backs.    I   think   it's   most   important,  as   we   go
into   those   talks,  to   have   defensive  as   well   as  offensive
missile  systems  up  for  discussion,  and  debate  and  negotia-
tions."
—Defense   Secretary  Laird: press  conference   Jan.  30
"The   deployment  now   of   the   Sentinel   missile    defense
woud   decisively  limit   the   U.S.   Government's  freedom   to
negotiate   when  the   strategic   talks   begin.   Politically,  the
dismantling  of   an  existing   system   would  be  very   difficult.
Thus  Sentinel  would  effectively   preclude  U.S.   negotiations
aimed  at  forestalling  a  Soviet  defensive  system.    It  is  the
deployment   of   Sentinel,   not   its   deferral,  which   ties   the
hands   of   the   U.S.   Government  in   future  negotiations.    A
deferred  system  can  always  be  built  later."
"Moreover,   if   negotiated    agreements    are   not   able   to
forestall  a  Soviet  missile  defense  system  —  now  universally
agreed  to  be  only  a  token  defense   of  a  single  city  —   then
the   United  States   MIRV    [independently    guided   multiple
warhead   missiles]    cannot   be   halted.   Its   avowed   purpose
was  the  penetration  of   a  Soviet  city  missile  defense.   But
the   MIRV   program   will   multiply   U.S.   warheads   several
times,  threatening Soviet  land-based  missiles  and  encourag-
ing    a   Soviet    MIRV    program.    Soviet    multiplication   of
warheads  on  each  launcher  will  threaten,  in  turn,  U.S.  land-
based  missiles.   ABMs  on  both  sides  will  then  be  thought
by  some  on  each  side  to  neutralize  sea-based   missiles.   And
both  sides  will   then  fear   that   neither   land  nor   sea-based
missiles    are    reliable   deterrents.     In   this    way,    and   by
strengthening   political,  economic   and   military  vested   in-
terests  on  both  sides,   U.S.  deployment  of  ABM  and  MIRV
will   generate   pressures   not  .likely   to   be   controllable   in
emerging  U.S.-Soviet  strategic   talks."
—The  Federation  of  American  Scientists  Feb.   6   opening
a  campaign  against  ABM   and  MIRV    as  destabilizing    fac-
tors  likely   to  cost  $50  billion  in  10  years.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  S4, 1969
themselves  Richard  A.  Stubbing's  study  of   the   low   efficiency
and   high   profits   which  mark   the   electronics   produced   for
U.S.   planes  and   missiles   to   which  we   referred   in   our   last
issue.   Senator  Fulbright  put   it  into  the  Congressional    Record
Feb.   7   (at   page   S1-150)   and   protested   the  Pentagon's    effort
to  classify   it.   The   study  shows  that  aerospace  ranked   second
only  to  drugs  among  ten  leading  industries  in  rate  of   return
on   net   worth   from    1957-64.     Aerospace    averaged      15.6%
but  the  drug  industry  topped  even  our  pampered   and  heavily
subsidized   arms  and   space  industry,  with   an   average   return
of   l6.3
r
/&
SINCE   THERE   Is   LITTLE  competitive  bidding   in  arms   and
much  of  aerospace  operates  with  government  owned  facilities,
this  drug  profit   record  is  extraordinary.   To   understand   why
read  the  article  by  James  L.  Goddard,  the  former  head  of  the
Food  and  Drug  Administration  in  the  March  issue  of  Esquire.
The  drug  industry  is  an  even  smoother   racket.   Like  the  arms
makers   it,   too,   uses   government    research   facilities  —   and
succeeds  in  making  the  public pay  twice  for  the  same  research,
first   in  taxes  and   then   in  profits   on  brand   names.   Goddard
exposes   the   interlocking   establishment   of   drug    companies,
doctors,   druggists  and   scientists  who   join   in  exploiting   the
poor,  the  sick  and  the  aged  by  fantastic overpricing.   Goddard
tells  of   his  unsuccessful  effort   to  bring  about   publication   of
a  national  Drug  Compendium   so  individuals,  like  big  insti-
tutional   purchasers,   could    also   save   money   buying    under
generic   instead  of   trade   names.    He   implies   that   the   only
way  out  may  be  to  make   the  drug   industry  a  public  utility.
A  better  way  would   for  government   owned   drug   plants   to
sell  basic products  in  competition  with  the  big  drug  companies
and  force  prices  down   to  reasonable   levels.
ON  THE  MOVE  —  BUT IN  WHICH DIRECTION?  An  article
in   the  January  Reader's   Digest   by  Carl   Rowan   and   David
Mazie  proclaims  "Black  Capitalism  On  The  Move,"  and  says
"Negro   self-help   projects    are   successfully   moving   blacks
into  the  mainstream  of  American  life."    But  the  president  of
an  association  of  Negro  mortgage   bankers  told  a  membership
luncheon    (New     York    Times,    Feb.    13)    that    black-owned
businesses   of   "significance"   are   fewer   in   number   than   they
were  40  years  ago.   Example:   in   1929   there  were  49  Negro-
owned   commercial  banks  in   38  cities,  now   there   are   20  in
19  cities.   The  head  of  Harlem's  new  $32  million   Freedom
The  Only  Way  To  Stop  Plane   Hi-Jacking
So   far   as   we   can   recall   the   speech    made   in   the
Senate   Feb.  7  by  Young  of  Ohio  is  the   first   in  which
any   member  of  Congress  has  dared  suggest  that   the
U.S.  resume  relations with  Cuba.  We  salute  him  for  it.
The   best   practical  argument  is   that   this   is   the   only
way  to  stop  plane  hi-jackings.  No  one  hi-jacks  planes
to  countries  with  which  the  U.S.  has  relations   because
the  hi-jacker  would  be  sent  back  with  the  plane  to  face
criminal   penalties.    The   loftiest    argument    is   moral
and   might   help   the   Czechs.   The   Russians   claim   the
right  to  put  the  heat  on  their  satellites   if  they   show
any   sign   of   deviating   from   "the   Socialist    common-
wealth."  The  analog  to  this  is  the  Caracas  doctrine  by
which  the  U.S.  expels  from  the  Organization  of  Amer-
ican    States    any   Latin   country    which   threatens    to
deviate    from    our    "capitalist    commonwealth."     The
Warsaw   pact  theoretically  protects   its   members   from
such   Big   Brother  intervention.   So   theoretically   does
the   Bogota   Pact   which  established   the   OAS.    For  10
years    we    have    nevertheless    waged    economic    war
against  Cuba,  strangling  its  commerce,  pressuring  other
nations  to  boycott  its   trade,  imposing  privation  upon
its  people.  Yet  a  Wall  Street  Journal  survey  two  days
before    Young's   speech   reported   that   despite    10,000
dissenters   in  jail  "Most  Cubans  Appear  Content  With
Castro's  10-Year  Old Regime  .  .  .  Improved  Education,
Health,  Wages  Win  Favor."   Young  points  out  that  we
have  not  broken relations  with a  single  military-Fascist
dictatorship,  even  Peru's,  which  seized  the  property  of
Standard  Oil  —  holy  of  holies!  Cuba  has  long   offered
to  negotiate  compensation  for  nationalized  U.S.  proper-
ty  if  we  resumed  relations.   Isn't  it  time  for  a  change?
National   Bank  told  the  same  meeting   affluent  blacks  were  not
supporting  it.
THE   U.S.   NAVY   ALWAYS.LEAKS   SCARE   stories  about   its
Soviet  rival  as  Congressional   appropriation   time  rolls  around.
The   Soviet  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean    is  this  year's   favorite
bogey.    But  Britain's   Defense   Secretary  Healey,  in   an   inter-
view  with   Der  Spiegel    (London  Times   Feb.   11)    says  it  is
"still  substantially  smaller   than  the  Italian  Navy"  and  if  war
broke   out   would    be   sunk   "within    minutes"   by   NATO's
forces.
The  Failure  of  The  Alliance   and  The  No.  1  Question   of  Latin  America's   Future
Colombia   ranks   third   in   Latin  America   in   total    U.S.
assistance.    The  results,   as   set   forth  in  a  report  just   re-
leased   by   Senator   Fulbright,   as   chairman  of   the   Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee,  are  dim.
Fulbright   assigned   Ellen  O.  Schwarz  of   the  Committee
staff  to  study  Colombia  as  a  case  history  in  U.S.   aid.  The
94-page   report  and  the   accompanying  100-page   report  by
the   Comptroller  General  after   18   months  of   work  repre-
sent   the   most   thorough   study   of   its   kind  yet   made.    It
covers   the   Alliance   for   Progress   period   since   1962,  when
economic  assistance   totalled  $732  million.  During  that  time
the  per  capita  gross  national  product  increased   only  from
$276  to  $295  a  year,  an  annual  average  of  1.2%  compared
to  the  Alianza   goal  of   2.5%.   The  peso  depreciated   from
8.50  to  the  dollar  in  1961  to   16.45  last   August.
The  number  of  functional  illiterates,  despite   considerable
aid  to  education,  is  up  from  5  to  more  than  6  .million  in
a  population of  19.8  million.  Agrarian  reform  has  provided
land   titles   to   only   54,000   of   close   to   500,000    landless
families   whose   numbers   are   increasing   by   10%   a   year.
The  report  reveals   that   the   major  emphasis   has   been   on
aid   to   the   large   commercial  farmers   "at  the   expense   of
rural  social  progress."  Taxes  have  been  increased   but  only
lately  have  efforts  been  made  to  improve  collection.   Colom-
bia   "has   barely  begun   to   tackle"   the   problem   of   better
income  distribution  "and  the  country's  social  structure  re-
mains   essentially   unchanged,   with   close   to   two-thirds   of
the   population  not   participating  in   the   economic   and  po-
litical  decision  making  process."
In  attempting  to  induce  economic  growth  while  braking
inflation   'the   rhetoric  of   the   Alliance   for   Progress   was
lost   in  the  arcane  world  of   international  finance."  Despite
some   short   term   success,   the   report   says   somberly   that
U.S.   assistance   helped   successive    Colombian    governments
"postpone  making  more  basic   reforms."
A  younger  generation   of   Latins  will  conclude   sooner  or
later  that  the  price  of  U.S.  aid  was  to  maintain  an  incompe-
tent   and  heartless  oligarchy   in   power.    Without  this  aid,
and  U.S.  coaching  in  counterinsurgency,  the  oligarchy  would
have   to   act   or  face   social   revolution.    Any   revolutionary
program  could  do  better  than  the  Alliance  has.   Let  us  put
it  in  the  baldest  arithmetic.   Alliance   aid  has  amounted   to
less  than  $7  per  capita  per  year.    Can  anyone  doubt   that
Colombia's  poor  could  do  far  better  than  that  on  their  own
if  idle  labor  were  put  to  work  on  idle  land  by  a  leadership
able  to  inspire and unite  them?
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  February  24,1969
Laird  Wildly  Misleading  On Offensive  Missiles  -   U.S.  Has 4-to-l  Lead
(Continued  From  Page   One)
Russians'   150)    in   the   missile   era   is  that   this   forces    the
Soviets   to   divert   resources   to   bomber   defense.    But   a  high
official   with  access  to   the   figures   said  that   even   if   the   cost
of    Russia's   SAM's    [surface-to-air]    and    interceptors    were
lumped  with  its  anti-missile spending,  Laird's  ratio  was  exag-
gerated.     Maybe   the   total   was   fattened   by   adding   in   the
cost   of   the   SAM's   Moscow   has   supplied   North    Vietnam.
For  anti-ballistic  missiles,  an   official   told  Robert   C.  Maynard
(Washington   Post,   Feb.   14),   "We   are  spending   at  least  as
much  money  as  the  Russians  are."   Another  reporter  was  told,
"I  cannot  declassify  the  figures  to  give  you  the  real  picture."
The  Pentagon   refused  to  explain  Laird's  figures  on  the  same
ground.    This  is  selective  declassification  in  a  numbers  game.
A  New   Kind  Of  Inflation
Laird  laid  it  on  thick  when  he  said  a  ratio  of  $3.50  to  $1
was  "very   close  to  a  $7   ratio  as  far   as  effort   is  concerned"
f Pace  The  Motion)   or  "seven  times  the  effort  we're  making  in
defensive  weapons  systems"   (Today    show).   To   grasp   this
whopper,    you   have   to   understand   how   these    comparative
figures   are  arrived  at.    The   Soviet  defense  budget   is   about
16  billion  rubles.   The   official  exchange  rate  would  make  this
about  $17.5  billion  dollars.   But  the  intelligence  experts  multi-
ply  the   16  billion  by  three  and  estimate  the  budget  in  dollar
terms   as  $50-billion.   This   is  based   on   the   view   that   the
same  level  of   effort   in   this  country  would   cost  three   times
as  much.   So  whatever  figures  Laird  got  were   already  multi-
plied  by  three  in  dollar  terms.   Laird  multiplied  them   again
by  two  to  get  his  "7   times  our  effort."
All  these  numbers  are  highly  speculative.   The  Russians  do
not   make   a  detailed  budget   available,   and   theirs   like  ours
no  doubt  hides  military  items  under   other  headings.   What
little  is  known  can   easily  be  juggled   by  taking  certain  time
spans.   Strategic  systems,  whether   offensive   or  defensive,  are
long-range  projects.  The  Russians are  trying  belatedly to  catch
up.    Laird  went  on  to  say that  in  offensive    strategic  weapons,
they  were  spending  a  ratio  of  $3  to  every  $2  we  spent.    One
wonders  what  time span  he  picked.   The  figures  are incredible
for  any  time  span.   Laird  on  the  Today   show   even   said   the
Russians  were  not  only  "now   outspending   us"   but   "they've
caught  up  to  us  in  the  offensive  weapons  system."   This  is  in
gross  contradiction to  the  latest  Pentagon   figures.   These  show
Military-Industrial-Labor  Complex ?
"Top  labor  officials  have  been  briefed  by  the  military
on  the  vital  role  they  are  to  play  in  the  construction,
testing   and   installation   phases   of   the   Sentinel   anti-
ballistic  missile defense  network  .  .  .  Each  [ABM]  will
require   the   employment  of   900   to   1,375   construction
workers  .  .  .  The  Sentinel  plan  was  spelled  out  for  the
leaders   of   major   trade   unions   in   a   special   briefing
recently  in  the  AFL-CIO  building  in  Washington,  D.C.
.  .  .  Included  .  .  .  were  M.  A.  Hutcheson  Carpenters'
General  President,  AFL-CIO  Building  Trades  President
C. 1    Hagert>  ...     A  SENSCOM   [Sentinel    Systems
Command]   officer   made  clear  '.  .  .  the  status  of   Sen-
tinel  employment as  one  of  national  priority.  Avoidance
of   lockouts  and  work  stoppages   is   necessary   if   this
nation   is   to   meet   the   projected  Chinese  Communist
threat  of  the mid-70s'."
—The  Carpenter   (Brotherhood    organ)   January   1969.
(p.   42   Clifford    statement  on   the   1970   Budget   dated   last
Jan.  15)  that  while the  USSR  now  has  900  ICBMs  compared
with   our   1,054,   when   Polaris  submarines  and   bombers   are
added,   our   total  strategic  offensive   forces   can   deliver  4200
warheads  as  compared  with  their  1200.   The  offensive  missile
gap   in  our   favor   is  more   than   4-to-l,   and   the  4200  war-
heads  are  10  times  as  many  as  the  400  McNamara   estimated
were  enough  to  destroy  the  Soviet: Union  as  a  viable  society.
Laird's  picture  becomes  even  more  misleading  when quality
as  well  as numbers are  taken  into  account.  The  Soviet  ICBMs
are  liquid-fuel;  the  kind  we  began  to  phase  out  in  the  Fall  of
1962.   Of  our  1,054  ICBMs  only  216  are  liquid-fueled  (Atlas
and   Titans).    Clifford's   last   report   said   "we   now   believe"
deployment  of  a  solid  fuel,  missile  "has  started."   The  liquid-
fuel   missile  takes  15  minutes  to  set  off;  the   solid  fuel,   less
than  a  minute.   The  liquid  fuel   is  so  full  of  valves  and   con-
trols,  misfires  are  to  be  expected.    So  the  Soviet  ICBMs,   like
its   anti-ballistic  missiles,  are   already  obsolete   by  our    stand-
ards.   We  hope  that  when   the  anti-ballistic  missile   hearings
start,   Senators   will   put   Laird   on   the   spot   and   make   him
justify  his  wild  statements.
How   can  Nixon   expect  the  Russians  to  take  his   offers  of
negotiation   seriously  when   his   Secretary  of   Defense    is   al-
lowed  to  talk  in  so  loose  and  inflammatory a  way?       Feb.  17
For  readers  who  want  more  ammunition   in  the  fight  against  the   ABM,    there   are   packets  available   from  the   Federation   of   American
Scientists  at  $1,   Room  313,   2025  I  St.  N.W.,    Washington,  D.C.,   20006  and  from  SANE,  at  75#,   381   Park   Ave.   South,   NYC  10016.
FOR   STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name
Street
City                                       Zip                State
Indicate   if  gift   announcement  wished   Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a  sub  for  the  enclosed   $5:
Name  .
Street
City   ...Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                    2/24/59
5618  Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W., Washington,  D.  C.  20015
F. Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,  N.  W.
Washington,  D.C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D.  C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly,     Second   Class  Postage  Paid   at   Washington,  D.   C.    Published  every  other  Monday  at  6618  Nebraska  Ave..   N.W..  Washington,  D. C.
An  independent   weekly   published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.:    $6  in  Canada:
S10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe:  120  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED