I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969may05.pdf

============================================================

Why  Student  Leaders  Will  Not  Fight  in  Vietnam,  P.  3
Ever  Wonder  What  The  Phrase   "Survival  Hangs  By  A  Thin  Thread"  Means?
"Some   of   McNamara's    departing   lieutenants   feel   the     Secretary   David  Packard   arrayed  against  the  generals."
only  hope  for  restraint  at  the  Pentagon  is  Laird  and Deputy         —Evans  &  Novak   in  the  Washington   Post,  April  17.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
l\/nii>   T^ithlicha/J     7?V_ T/f//7z7»//ii                             •^
Now  Published Bi-  Weekly
VOL.  XVII,  NO.  9
MAY   5, 1969
°'
01
        WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Uncle  Sam's  Con  Man  Budget
It's  fortunate  for  the  U.S. government  that  it  is  not  subject
to   the  SEC.  Any   corporation   which   filed   annual  financial
reports  like  the  new  Federal   budget  would  run  afoul  of  SEC
accounting  requirements  designed  to  protect  the  investor.   Let
us  begin  with  the  claim  that  it  now  has  a  surplus  instead  of  a
deficit.    If   a  present-day  conglomerate    had   among  it's  sub-
sidiaries  an  insurance  company,  and  set  up  its  over-all  annual
accounts  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  appear   that   the  legal
reserves   of   its  insurance  company  were  available  to   meet   a
deficit   in   its   other   business   operations,    that    conglomerate
would  soon  find  itself  hailed  into  court  by  the  SEC  or  its  own
stockholders.   Nixon's   claim  of  a  $5.8 billion  surplus  for  the
coming  1970  fiscal  year  is  based   on  just  such   fiction.   It  is
achieved  by  lumping  the  surpluses  in  the  government's   trust
funds   with   the   deficit   in   its   normal   operations.    Johnson
did  the  same  thing   in  January  when   he  unveiled  his  1970
budget   and   claimed   a  budget   surplus   of  $3.4 billion.    The
main   source   of   both   claims   to   a   surplus   lay  in   the   huge
social  security  funds,  the  government's   public  insurance  busi-
ness.    These   and   other   trust   funds   are   segregated   by   law
and  not  usable  for  any other  purpose.
Same  Flim-Flam   Johnson   Used
When  Johnson   presented   his  budget,   Senator  Williams  of
Delaware    pointed   out   that   the   Johnson   calculations   of   a
surplus  for  both  fiscal  '69  and  '70  were  based  on  the  existence
in   1969 of  a  $9.3   billion   and   in  1970  of  a  $10.2 billion
surplus  in  these  trust  funds.  "Under  the  law," Williams  told
the  Senate,   "no   Administration  and  no  Congress  can  divert
these   trust  funds   to   defray   the   normal   operating   expenses
of  the   Government."     Williams   said  that   if  this   bit   of   de-
ceptive   accounting   were   eliminated,   it  would   be   seen   that
Johnso'n  had  a  deficit  of  $6.9 billion  instead  of  a  surplus  of
$2.4  billion  in  fiscal  '69  and  a  deficit  of  $6.8 billion  instead
of  a  surplus  of  $3.4 billion  in  1970.  Senator  Williams   told
me  after  Nixon's  budget  revisions  were  made  public  that  all
his  criticism  of  Johnson's  budget  was  equally  applicable  to
Nixon's.   Nixon's  claimed  $5.8 billion  surplus  for  1970 was
really  a  deficit  of  $4.4 billion  if  the  trust  fund  reserves  were
deducted.*
Of   course   this   method   of   Federal   accounting   has   been
going  on  for  years  and  of  course   it  accurately  measures   the
net   impact   on  the  economy   of  Federal  collections   and pay-
ments   from   the  standpoint   of  inflation.   In  earlier   days  this
~  Williams  also  criticized   Johnson   for   failing   to  include
in   the  1970 budget   a  $2.7 billion   Commodity   Credit   loss
which  the  government  must  pay  sooner  or  later.   Nixon, too,
brushed   this  same   item  under  the   table.   To  carry   on  the
same  metaphor,  $2.7  billion  is  quite  a  crumb.
The  Truth  About  That   Korean  Incident
Nixon  claims  our  plane  was  not  closer  than  40  miles
to  the  Korean  coast  when  shot  down.  We  enforce  far
wider  limits  on  our  own  shores.   A  U.S. Air   Defense
Identification    Zone   requires   all    planes   to    identify
themselves  when  two  hours  out.  The  U.S. Naval Acad-
emy's  International  Law  for  Sea-Going  Officers   teaches
our  men  that  "the right  of  a  nation  to  protect  itself
from  injury" is  "not  restricted  to  territorial  limits  .  .  .
It  may  watch  its   coast   and  seize   ships   that  are  ap-
proaching  it  with  an  intention  to  violate  its  laws.   It
is   not   obliged  to   wait   until   the  offense   is   consum-
mated."    Were   North   Korean   reconnaissance   planes
to  begin  spying  out  our  coastal  defenses  we  would  not
wait  until  they   were  within  our  three-mile  limit.   A
Reuters   dispatch   from   Washington   we   saw   in   the
York,  Pa., Gazette   &  Daily   April  18  disclosed   these
EC-121s   were   used   during  U.S.   bombing   raids   on
North   Vietnam  "because   they   could   remain   far   off
the   coast   and  still   jam   ground   radar   used   to   aim
Soviet-built   ground-to-air   missiles."    It   is   not   only
a  spy  plane  but  can  disrupt  radio  transmissions.    The
Korean  civil  war  may  break  out  again   at  any   time.
Each  side  sees  the  other  as  aggressive.   In  the  Korean
war  U.S. planes  levelled literally  everything  above  the
38th  Parallel.  No  country  has  ever  been  so  completely
destroyed    by   bombing   as   was    North    Korea.    The
memory  must  stir  hate  and  fear  beyond  our  compre-
hension.    Under  the  circumstances  it  is  hypocrisy  for
a   great   power  like  ourselves  to  claim  the  protection
of  "international  law"  for  activities  so  small  a  nation
may   reasonably  see  as  preparation  for  a  repeat per-
formance  if  the  war  resumes.  It  is  folly  to  risk  another
Asian  war  by  these  flights.  It  was  silly  to  put  a  huge
fleet  in,  and  within  24  hours  take  it  out. The  incident
is  another  warning of  how  incompetent  is  our military
bureaucracy   and  how  little  it  can  be   trusted.
was   called   the   "national    income   account"   as   distinguished
from  the  administrative  budget.    But  the  administrative bud-
get   is  the   better   index   to   the  government's  fiscal   solvency
since  a  deficit  in  normal   operations   does   not   become   visible
in  the  consolidated  cash  account  or  "unified  budget"  until  the
deficit  has  grown  so  large  that  it  even  wipes  out  the  surplus
in   the   trust   funds.   The   danger   signal   blinks   later   in   the
"unified  budget".   Earlier  budget  messages  used  to  give  both
the  consolidated   account  and  the  administrative  budget.   But
though  the  basic  1970 budget  presentation   takes  four   separate
volumes  which  total  2,012 pages  (and weigh,  even  in  paper-
back,  7  pounds),  there  is  no  place  in  it  where  one  can  find
the  administrative  budget.   Why  admit  that  the  operations  of
(Continued  on Page Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  5,1969
(Continued  from  Page  One)
the  government  are  still  in  the  red,  if  you  can  make  it  look  as
if   they  are  in  the  black?   The   $10.2   billion  surplus  in  the
trust  funds  helps  to  dampen  inflation  but  it  is not  available to
buy  bombs  for  B-52s or to feed  the hungry.
The   "unified  budget"   has   another   effect.    It  understates
the  extent  to  which  the  war  machine  eats  up  public  revenues.
The  first  chart  in  the  budget  message  purports  to  show  that
41  cents  of  every  dollar  in  expenditure  goes  to  the  military.
But  if  the  trust  funds  of  the  government  are  separated  from
the  rest  of   its  activities,  then  the  military  share  is  about   55
cents.    The   sums   Americans   pay  into   social   security   trust
funds  for  unemployment,  old  age  and  other  insurance  are  no
different  in  this  sense  from  the  sums  they  pay  private  insur-
ance  companies.    There  is  no   more  reason  to   lump   public
insurance  than  private  insurance  funds  with  the  general  rev-
enues  of  the  government  in  measuring  the  impact  of military
expenditures.
Pentagon  Takes  56  Cents  Of  Every  Dollar
The  way  to  begin  to  see  the  real  fiscal  impact  of  the  war
machine  is  to  begin  with  the  memorandum  line  on  p.  526  of
the  main  budget  volume where  "receipts  by source" are shown.
This  discloses  that of  $198  billion  in  receipts,  $51  billion  is in
trust  funds.   This  leaves  available  for  the  general  purposes  of
the  government   $147   billion.   If  you  next  turn  to  the  table
on  "budget  outlay  by  function,"   you  will  find  $81.5   billion
for  national  defense.   So  national  defense  takes  55  percent  of
this  $147   billion.   Then  if  you  look   more  closely  you  will
see  near   the  foot   of  the  expenditure   table   $2.8   billion   for
civilian  and  military  pay  increases.   The  Pentagon's   share  of
that,  for  its  employees  in  and  out  of  uniform   (the   Pentagon
employs   nearly  one-half   of  all  the  civilian  employees   in  the
government)  is  $2.5  billion.   When  that  additional  pay  item
is  added,   the   total   for   national   defense   is  $83   billion,   or
better  than  56  cents  of  every  dollar  available.   That  is  a  third
(actually   36%)    more  than  the  41  cents   shown   in  the  first
budget  chart.*
At  the  same  time,  lumping  the  trust  funds  with  the  general
* I  can   remember  when  a  feature  of   the   annual  federal
budget   presentation   was   a   chart  showing   how   much   was
absorbed   by   past,   present   and   future   wars.    This   added
military  expenditures, veterans'  benefits  and interest  charges,
the  last  item  because  past  wars  are  the  real  reason  for  the
public  debt.  These  three  items  in  the  1970 budget  total  more
than  $106 billion  and will  take  more than  70%  of  the  general
revenues.    Secretary  Laird  said  the  other  day  that  much  of
the  Soviet  Union's  space  activity  was  really  military.  This  is
also  true  of  our  space  program.   The  funds  spent  on  rocket
boosters   to  reach  the  moon  also  improve  the  technology  of
mass   murder  by  intercontinental  ballistic  missile.   If   space
is  added  to  the  other  three  items,  the  total  is  $110  billion,
or  almost  75%  of  the  $147 billion  available.
Even  Aerospace Organs  Skeptical  of  The  ABM
"Any  effective   ABM  system  must  achieve  a  degree
of   efficiency   hitherto  unknown   to  defense.   For,   with
high  megaton  warheads  in   the   offense,   even  a  90%
efficient  ABM  system  probably  could  not  limit  damage
to  an  acceptable  level."
—Editorial:  Aviation  Week  March  SI
"If  any  current  defense  project  had  to  become  em-
broiled  in  politics, it  couldn't  have  happened  to  a  more
marginal   one   [than   Sentinel].    In   view   of   the   thin
Chinese  threat  it   is   meant   to  counter  and  the  thick
wad  of  dollars  it  would  cost  ...    I  see  this  as  a  healthy
development.   The  sacred  cow  status  of  defense  during
most  of  the  years  since  World  War  II  was  not  healthy
...      I  have  hopes  that  we  will  learn  to  see  defense
in  a  clearer  perspective  if  the  implications  and  rami-
fications  of   a  weapon  system   like   Sentinel   are  aired
in  public  .  .  .  Defense  is  essential,   but  so  are  a  few
other   things."
—Enylebert   Kirchner,   executive    editor   of    Space/
Aeronautics  in  its  February   issue.
revenues  exaggerates  the  government's  contributions  to  health
and   welfare.    Johnson   boasted   that   outlays  for   health   and
welfare  in  his  1970   budget   would  be  $55  billion  "which  is
28%   of   Federal   outlays  .  .  .  more  than   double  the   level
prevailing  in  1964"   when  his  War  on  Poverty  was  launched.
But  $42.9  billion  of  this  was  to  come   "from   self-financed
trust  funds  for  retirement  and  social  insurance and  Medicare."
So  almost  four-fifths   of  this  benevolent  munificence was  from
the  beneficiaries.   Only  the  difference,  $12.1  billion,  represents
outlays  from  the  general   revenues.    That  is  about   8%,   not
28%.
While  the  government  was  to  pay  $42.9  billion  from  these
insurance  and  health  trust  funds,   it  would   collect  a  total  of
$45.8  billions  in  fiscal  1970,   or  almost  $3  billion  more  than
it  paid  out.   This  addition  to  the  surplus  in  the  trust  funds  is,
of  course,  anti-inflationary,  for  it  cuts  down  purchasing   power,
but  this  is  purchasing  power  at  the  bottom   of  the   economic
pyramid,  taken  from   those   least   able   to  pay.   Regarded  as
taxation,  social  security  deductions  from   payroll   represent  a
savagely   regressive  —   and,   unlike   so  many   income   taxes,
inescapable—form  of  taxation.   I  can  remember,  when  social
security  legislation  was  first  being  drafted   in  the   early  days
of  the  New  Deal,  writing  editorials  proposing  —  as did  other
liberals  and  radicals —  that  it  be  financed  out  of  income  taxes
so  as  to  create a  more  equitable  distribution  of  wealth,  taking
funds   from  the  top  of   the  pyramid  to   ease  poverty  at   the
bottom.   The   Social  Security  system  adopted,  which  we  still
have,  essentially  takes  from  the  poor  what  it  gives  them,  and
gives  less  than  it takes.
The  Welfare   System  and   the  War   on  Poverty   were   ad-
missions  that   social   security  was  abysmally  inadequate.    But
Congressmen  Beginning   to  Ask  Why  Duplicate  Protection  of  Minutemen  Sites
"Defense  Dept.  continuation  of  the  Minuteman hard-rock
silo   development  program  .  .  .  may  prove  a   major  em-
barrassment    to   the   Administration.    The   Johnson   Ad-
ministration  described  the  hard-rock  plan  as  a  substitute
for  ABM  protection  ...      A  total  of  $58  million  planned
by  the  Johnson  Administration  for  hard-rock  silo  develop-
ment  is  retained  in  the  Laird  Fiscal  1970  budget  .  .  ."
—Aviation   Week   and  Space   Technology,   April   14,  1969
"Superhard  missile  silos  now  being  constructed  will  pro-
vide  the  same  protection  for  U.S.  Minuteman as  an  anti-
ballistic  missile,  Air  Force  Secretary  Brown  told  the  Senate
Appropriations   Committee   .   .   .   Air   Force   officials   en-
vision   Minuteman  III   silos   with   hardness   in   excess   of
2,500  psi   [pounds  per  sq.  inch],  or  10  times   the   current
rating  .  .  .  Completion of  the  super-hardening  is  expected
to   coincide  with  the   first   deployment  of   Soviet  multiple
independently   targeted   reentry   vehicles   (MIRV)   in   the
early   1970s  ...      It   would  require  up  to  four  times  the
megatonnage,   delivered   with   near   perfect   accuracy,   to
destroy  a  superhard silo  .  .  .  The  Soviets  are  not  expected
to  possess  enough  striking  power  to  destroy   U.S.  second-
strike   missile   capability,   Under   cover   of   the   super-hard
silo  program,  for  the  foreseeable   future."
—Aviation   Week   &  Space   Technology,   May   13,  1968
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  5, 1969
Johnson's  War   on  Poverty  was  made  to  look  far  more  ex-
tensive   than   it   was,  and   Nixon's  revisions   use   the   same
deceptive  computations.  "Our   1970  Revised  Budget,"  says  a
Budget   Bureau   statement   of   April   14,   "involves   a    10%
increase  over  FY   '69  in  spending  for  the  poor  (italics  in  the
original).   This  reflects  our  deep  commitment  to  the  under-
privileged."   The  Budget  Bureau  statement  did  not  explain,
however,  that  this  also  represented  a  cut  of  $300  million  in
Johnson's  poverty   recommendations   for   fiscal   1970  —   nor
that  much  of  this  bloated  estimate  is  padded out  with  normal
payments  from  social  security.
How  The  Figures  Are  Padded
Johnson  claimed  he  would  spend  $27.2  billion  on   "Fed-
eral  Aid  to  the  Poor".  Nixon  out  of  that  "deep  commitment"
revised  this  downward to  $26.9  billion.   The  biggest  item  in
Johnson's,  as  in  Nixon's,  Federal  Aid  to  The  Poor  compila-
tion  (at  p.  47  of  the  main  budget  message  volume)  is $13-5
billion  for  "income  assistance."  My  curiosity  was  piqued  by
a   discrepancy  of   almost  $10   billion  between   this   item   and
a  passage  at  pages  42-3  of  the  Budget  in  Brief.   This  said
that  Federally  aided  public  welfare  would  in  fiscal  1970  pro-
vide  assistance  to  a  monthly  average of  10  million  individuals
at  a  total   cost  of   $7  billion.   "The   Federal  share,"  it  said,
"was  $3.7  billion."   When  I  asked  the  Budget  Bureau where
the  rest  of  the  claimed  figure  of  $13.5  billion  came  from,  I
got  this  compilation  (in millions):
600    administrative  expenses
6,300    old age  pensions
400    R.R. retirement  pensions
500    unemployment  insurance
2,100    Veterans  Administration*
$9,900    Total
The  figures  given  me  were  "rounded"  and  so  the  final  totals
do  not  quite  match  but  this  $9.9   billion  of  "padding"  ex-
plains  how  that  $3.7  billion  in  Federal  welfare  income  as-
sistance  was  made  to  look  like  $13.5  billion.
It   is  fortunate   that  few   people  on   welfare   spend  their
spare  time  reading  the  Federal budget.  It  would  foment  riots.
The  Budget  Bureau  "press  kit"  for  Nixon's  revisions  of  the
1970  budget  says  these  involve  "hard  choices"  and  are  part
of  the  Nixon  Administration's  "concern  for  the  poor."  Nixon
added   $300   million   for   dependent  children  but   squeezed
-  The  Budget   Bureau,   when  I   asked  what  the   Veterans'
Administration  had  to  do  with  the  war  on  poverty,  explained
that  80%  of  veterans'  pensions,  75%  of  veterans'   survivors'
pensions   and   20%   of   other   veterans'    benefits    had   been
counted  as  "Federal  Aid  to  The  Poor"  in  the  Johnson   table!
Apartheid  Si,  Castro's   Cuba  No
"Let  me  make  clear  at  the  outset  that  our  economic
relations  with  other  countries   should  not  and  do  not
imply  approval  or  disapproval  of  their  forms  of   gov-
ernment  or  of  their   policies   .  .  .  We  do  not   believe
that  economic  quarantine  or  isolation   would  lead   the
South   African  Government  to   abandon   apartheid."
Deputy   Asst.  Sec.   of  State  Julius  Katz,  April  15,
telling   the  House   African    Affairs    Subcommittee   why
we  still  buy  sugar  from  South   Africa.
"HAVANA,  April  25  (AP)—Eight   Roman  Catholic
Bishops   have   called   for   a   lifting   of   the   economic
boycott   of   Cuba,   which   is   fostered   by   the    United
States.   The  appeal  was  made  in  a  four-page   pastoral
letter    .   .   .    [which]    refers   to   the   boycott   as   an
'economic   blockade.'    The   Bishops   said   that   Cuba's
economic   isolation  is   creating   grave   difficulties   'that
weigh   principally  on   our   workers   of   city   and   field,
upon  our  housewives,  upon  our  growing  children,  upon
our  sick,  upon  so  many  families   affected  by  separation
from  loved  ones  .  .  .'"
—New  York  Times, April  26.
$200  million  of  this  out  of  a  projected   increase  in  our  piti-
fully  low  old  age  pensions.  "For  the  aged,"  the  same Budget
Bureau  explanation  says,  "a  1%   social  security  cost-of-living
increase  is  included  in  the  revised  1970  budget."   It  does  not
explain  that  this  is  a  revision  downward   from  the   10%   in-
crease  recommended by Johnson, nor  that  Nixon  also shelved
Johnson's  proposal  to   increase  the   minimum   from   $55   a
month  to  $80  a  month.  There  are  2,000,000  Americans  —
believe  it   or  not  —   now  expected  to   enjoy   retirement   on
$55  a month!  Instead  of  getting  a  $35  raise to  $80  a  month,
they  will   only  receive  the  general  1%   increase,  though   I
was  told  this  would  be  "rounded  off"  so  that  instead  of  a
mere  $3.85,  they  would  get  $4  or  $5  a  month  more.   This
could  bring  them  up  to  $60  a  month.   Thanks  to  the  Ad-
ministration's  concern for  them, moreover,  the  revised  legisla-
tion  "includes liberalization  of  the   social  security  retirement
test"   allowing  them  to  earn  more  outside  income  without
having  it  deducted   from   their  pensions.   The  liberalization
turns  out  to  be  $120  a  year,  about  $2  a  week*,  and  raises  the
* The  liberalization  will  allow  a  maximum of  $1800  a  year
without  deductions.   By  comparison  retired  professional   mili-
tary   men   (20   years   service)   are   allowed   under  the   Dual
Compensation  Act  of   1964  to  fill  Civil  Service  jobs   paying
up  to  $30,000  and  still  collect  their  full  pensions,   a  privilege
not  given  other  veterans.    Under  the  new  pay  raise  this  will
(Continued  on  Page  Pour)
Why  253  Student  Leaders   Vow  To  Refuse  Service  Until  The  War  Is  Ended
"Students   have,   for   a   long   time,   made   known   their
desire  for  a  peaceful  settlement  ...     In  December  of  1966,
our  predecessors   as   student   body   presidents   and   editors,
in   a  letter   to   President   Johnson,   warned   that   'a   great
many   of   those   faced   with  the   prospect   of   military   duty
find  it  hard  to  square  performance  of  the  duty  with  con-
cepts   of   personal   integrity   and  conscience.'    In   June   of
1967,  our  predecessors  submitted  a  petition  signed  by  over
10,000  draft  eligible  students  from  nine  campuses,   calling
for  alternative   service.   Despite  all  our  efforts,  the  Selec-
tive   Service   System  has  remained   impervious  to   contrac-
tive  change.   ...
"Most    of    us    have    worked    in   electoral   politics    and
through  other  channels  to  change  the  course  of   America's
foreign  policy.   We  will  continue,   but  the   possible   results
of  these  efforts   will  come   too  late   for  those   whose  de-
ferments  soon  expire.   We  must  make  an  agonizing   choice:
to  accept   induction,   which  we  feel   would  be  irresponsible
to  ourselves,   our  country,  and  our  fellow   man;  or  to  re-
fuse   induction,  which  is   contrary   to  our  respect  for  law
and  involves  injury  to  our  personal   lives  and  careers.
"Left  without  a  third  alternative,   we  will  act   according
to   our   conscience.    Along   with   thousands   of   our   fellow
students,  we  campus   leaders   cannot  participate   in  a  war
which  we  believe   to  be  immoral   and  unjust.   We   publicly
and  collectively   express  our  intention  to   refuse   induction
and  to  aid  and  support  those  who  decide   to  refuse.    We
will   not   serve   in   the   military   as   long   as   the   war   in
Vietnam  continues."
—Statement    (slightly     abridged)     by   255  student    body
presidents   and   college   newspaper    editors   in    conjunction
with  a  similar  letter  to  President  Nixon,  April  18.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May  5, 1969
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
ceiling  on allowed  earning  to $36  a  week!   What  a  dolce  vita!
Roughly  a  billion  each  was  cut  out  of  social  security  and
out   of   the   military   budget   by   Nixon.    This   symmetry   of
sacrifice  is  deceptive.   Before  anyone  starts  dropping  pennies
into cups  for  the  Pentagon,  I  would  like to  lift  the  curtain  on
another  murky  corner  of  the  budget.   To  evaluate the  Nixon
military  "economies"   you  have  to  go  back  for  another  look
at  the  Johnson  budget  for   1970.   This  projected   a  drop  of
$3.5  billion  in  the  costs  of  our  "Southeast  Asia  operations."
This  was  to  be  our  first  dividend  on  the  road  to  peace,  the
money   to   be   saved  principally  by  ending   the   bombing  of
the  North.    Johnson   in  making  up   his   budget   could   have
allocated  this  $3.5  billion  to  welfare  or  to  the  rebuilding of
the   cities.    Instead   Johnson's   budget   allocated   $4.1   billion
more  to  military  spending  unconnected  with  the  Vietnam  war.
This  accounts  for  the  fact  that  in  his   1970   budget   the  cost
of  national  defense  rose  by  more  than  half  a  billion  dollars
over  1969  despite  the  projected  $3.5  billion  drop  in  the  costs
of  the  Vietnam  war.
A  Monster  At  The  Head  Of  The  Table
This  favored  treatment  of  the  military  machine  has  to  be
seen  against the  background  of  a  figure  revealed  in  the  Nixon
revisions.   His  revised  budget  estimates  for  fiscal  1969   which
ends   next   June   30   discloses   that   $7.3   billion   had   to   be
squeezed  out  of   the  normal  civilian  and  welfare   operations
of  the  government  in  this  fiscal  year  to  meet  .the  expenditure
ceilings  imposed  by  Congress   as  a  condition   for  voting   the
10%  surtax.  This  squeeze  over  and  above  the  original   1969
budget  was  made  necessary  by  an  unexpected   rise  in  certain
"uncontrollable"   items  exempt  from  mandatory  ceilings.   The
biggest  uncontrollable  item  was  the  Vietnam   war  which   cost
$3  billion  more  in  fiscal   1969  than  had  been  budgeted  for   it.
So  all  kinds  of   services  were  starved   in   1969   to  meet   the
swollen   costs   of   Vietnam   in  fiscal  '69.    Yet   when   a   $3.5
billion  drop  in  Vietnam  war  costs  were  projected   for  fiscal
'70,   the   amount   saved   was  not   allocated   to   the   depleted
domestic  sector  but  to  the  growth  of  the  war   machine.
Nixon's  cut  of  $1  billion  in  military  outlays  can  only  be
evaluated  properly   if  you  first  start  by  observing   that  it  was
a  cut  in  a  projected  $4.1  billion  increase in  military  spending.
The  cut  came  out  of  a  lot  of  fat,  whereas  the  cut  in  health,
mean  retired  army  officers  can  draw  up  to  $50,000  a  year
in  Civil  Service  pay  and  pensions.
Nixon    Pipe-Dream
"Political  stability  in  South  Vietnam  has  increased
significantly  since  this  Administration  came into  office."
—President   Nixon's   press   conference,   April   18.
"PARIS,   April   19—Nixon's  stand  on  possible  one-
sided  reduction in  U.S.  troop strength  in  Vietnam  .  .  .
has  added to  the  uncertainties on  this  conference scene
.  .  .  North  Vietnamese  sources  here  argue  it  is  in-
conceivable   there  can   be  anything   more  than  token
or  propagandistic cutbacks  in  U.S.  forces  .  .  .  They
maintain   any   major   reduction  in   American  combat
troops   will   cause   the   South   Vietnamese  government
to  collapse.   Many  allied  experts  here  privately  agree.
They  measure  the  ability  of  South  Vietnamese troops
to  take  over  any  significant  proportion of  the   fighting
in  years,   not  months."
—Murray  Marder  in  the  Washington  Post,  April  20.
education  and  welfare,  and   domestic  services,  came  close  to
the  bone  and  gristle.   The  second  point  to  be  made  about  the
military  cuts  is  that  they  represent  no  real  overhaul   of   the
bloated  military  budget.   Robert  S.  Benson,  former  aid  to  the
Pentagon     Comptroller,     recently    showed     (in    the    March
issue  of   The   Washington   Monthly)    how   easily   $9   billion
could   be   cut   out   of   military  spending   without    impairing
national  security.   But  the  three   main  "economies"  cited  by
the  Nixon  backgrounders  are  sleight-of-hand.    One  is  "lower
consumption   of  ammunition  in  Vietnam".    This  looks  opti-
mistic  in  view  of  the   enemy  offensive   and   our  own   search-
and-destroy  missions;  as  in  other   years,  this  may  be  one  of
those   preliminary  under-estimates  which  turn  up  later  in  a
supplemental   request  for  funds.   The  second  "saving"  conies
out  of  the  shift  from  Sentinel  to  Safeguard,  but  the   reduction
in  fiscal  1970  will  be  at  the  expense  of  larger  ultimate   costs.
Indeed   while  the  Nixon   estimates  show  that  Safeguard  will
ultimately  cost   $1.5   billion   more,   McGraw  Hill's   authorita-
tive  DMS,   Inc.,   service  for  the  aerospace   industry  puts  the
final cost  $4.3  billion  higher,  or  a total  of  $11 billion  without
cost  overruns  (which   DMS  expects).   The  third   "economy"
cited  is  $326  million  saved   (as  a  Washington   Post  editorial
noted   tartly   April   3)    by   "postponing   procurement   of   a
bomber  missile   (SRAM)   that   doesn't  yet  work."    Like  all
else  in  the  Nixon  Administration,  the  budget  revisions  repre-
sents   feeble   compromises   which   give   the   military   machine
priority   over   the  growing  urban,   racial   and   student   crises.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
Index  For  1968   Now  Ready—Send   Long  Stamped   Addressed  Envelope  for   Free  Copy
FOR  STONE'S  NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of  Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City                                     Zip               State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement wished  Q
Please  renew   (or  enter)  a  sub  for  the  enclosed  $5:
Name
Street
City  ...
Zip..
State....
L  F.  Stone's  Weekly                       s/s/69
4420  29th  St.  N.W,   Washington,  B.C.   20008
/  E Stone's  Weekly
4420  29th  St.,    N.W.
Washington,  D. C   20008
(Note  Corrected   Address)
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Second  Class  Postage  Paid  at   Washington,   D. C.   Published   every   other   Monday   at   4420   29th   St..    N.  W..   Washington.   D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada:
S10 elsewhere.   Air  Man rates:  $17  to  Europe:  S20 to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED