I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969nov03.pdf

============================================================

The  Cost  of  American  Imperialism,  Pps.  2-3
Even  Saigon's  Rigged  Assembly  Shows  A  Covert  Sympathy For  The  Moratorium
Another  Deputy,  Phan  Xuan  Huy,  said  he  believed  the
main  reason  for  the  demonstrations  in  the  U.S.  was  the  un-
willingness  of  young  people  to  fight,  and  said  many  South
Vietnamese   and   North   Vietnamese   were   equally   disen-
chanted  with  the  war.
—Reuters   from   Saigan   Oct  23  on  the  debate   in  South
Vietnam's     National    Assembly    on   an   "anti-Moratorium"
resolution. Significantly    only  98 of  the  137  legislators  showed
up  and  40  of  those  present  abstained  on  the  vote. Only  58 or
less  than  half   the  total  membership   voted  for  this  measure
which  was  framed   by  the  hawks.   It  seems  to  have   turned
into  a  covert  peace  demonstration  instead.
I. R  Stone's  Weekly
7V7xwit   TyAililieLtnsI     C*_T/T/l>/»fc/Ai                              ^^
Now  Published Bi- Weekly
VOL.   XVII,  NO. 20
NOVEMBER  3,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  B.C.
20   CENTS
He  Couldn't  Care  Less
The  best  argument  for  marching  on   Washington   again—
and   again—is  that  nothing   really  is  going   on  here.   Unless
the  peace  movement  keeps  the  heat  on,  the  Vietnamese  war
will  drag  on  endlessly. It  is  impossible—I  am  convinced  from
public  observation   and  private  soundings—to   exaggerate   the
banality  and   shallowness  of  this  Administration,  its  rigidity
and  lack  of  political  savvy.  There  were,  for  example,   half  a
dozen  ways  in  which,  by  some  kind  and  human  gesture,   the
White  House  might  have disarmed  and,  in  the  phrase  fashion-
able  among  the young,  "co-opted"  the  Oct.  15 Moratorium.  To
march  with  the  thousands  in  the  candle-light  procession   that
night   was   a   religious   experience.   There   was  little   rancor.
The  Agnew  attack  served  only  to  reveal  how  completely   the
White  House  misconceived   the  real  tenor  and  mood  of  that
demonstration.   Imagine   the   reaction  of   that   good-humored
and  solemn  throng  if  a  candle  had  been  lit  to  greet  them  from
the  balcony  of  the  White   House,   and  Nixon   had   issued   a
statement- saying,  "Welcome  to  Washington.   I,  too,   though
in  my  own  way, pray  and  seek  for  peace".
Chance For A Little  Charisma
A  more  recent  opportunity  to  disarm   the  opposition   came
with  the  news  that  the  strategic  arms  limitation  talks  (SALT)
were  finally  to  begin  on  Nov.   17.  Ambassador  Dobrynin,  un-
beknownst   to  the  press,   brought   the  news  of   Soviet   agree-
ment   to   the   President   on   Monday,   Oct   20.  Nixon   could
have  turned  the  announcement  into  a  grandstand  play.  With-
out  the  arms  race  and  the  Vietnam  war,  there  would  be  no
growing  inflationary  crisis.  Flanked  by  Secretaries  Rogers   and
Laird,  Nixon   could  have  acquired  a  little  charisma  by  pre-
senting  himself  as  a  man  concerned  with  lightening  the  bur-
den  of  the  arms  race.  He  could  have  taken  credit  for  finally
getting  talks  started.  Instead  the  news  was not  broken  officially
until  Oct.   25,  a  Saturday,  the  poorest  day  of  the  week  for  a
major  pronouncement.   It  was  made  not  by  the  President  but
by  Ron  Ziegler,  and  when   reporters   gathered   at  the  White
House  that  morning  all  they  got  was  one  frigid   sentence—
Confirming  the  agreement  reached  earlier  to  enter   into
negotiation  to  curb  the  strategic  arms  race,  the  Govern-
ments  of  the  United  States  and  USSR  have  agreed  that
specially  designated   representatives  of   the   U.S.   and  the
Soviet  Union  will  meet  in  Helsinki  on  November  17, 1969,
for  preliminary  discussion   of  the  questions  involved.
Forgotten  Words Dept.
But  Now  We're  Masochists  and  Snobs
"When   we   debate   American  commitments  abroad
...      if  we  expect  a   decent  hearing  from   those  who
now  take  to  the  streets   in  protest,  we  must  recognize
that  neither  the  Department  of   State  nor  of  Defense
has  a  monopoly  on  all  wisdom.  We  should  bring  dis-
senters   into   our   policy  discussions,   not   freeze  them
out  .  .  ."
—None   other  than  Richard   M.  Nixon  in  a  pre-elec-
tion radio  broadcast,  Sept.  19, 1968.
In   this   cold   turkey  treatment  of   the   announcement,   the
White  House  showed   itself   considerably  to  the  right  of  its
principal  Southern   (and  military)  mentor,  Strom   Thurmond,
a  Major  General  in  the  Army  Reserves  and  a  member  of  the
Senate   Armed   Services  Committee.   Thurmond   was   less   in-
sensitive  than  Nixon.  The  Senator  told  the  AP   (Washington
Star,  Oct.  26)   he  was  hopeful  "the  talks  will  result  in  a  sig-
nificant  reduction of  arms and  thereby increase the  opportunity
for   peace  in  the  world".    The  word   "reduction"   Thurmond
used  was  too  radical   for  the  Nixon  Administration.   Ziegler
had  referred  all  questions  to  a  special  press  conference Rogers
held  at  the  State  Department  after  the  White  House   briefing.
The  Secretary was  obviously  under  strict  instructions  to  be  as
low-keyed   and   astringent  as  possible.   He   told   the  press   to
"keep  in  mind"  that  the  word  used  in  the  White  House  an-
nouncement  was  "curbing"  the  strategic  arms  race.  To  curb,
according  to  Webster's,   is  "to  keep  in  check,  to  restrain,"  not
to  reduce.
At  only  one  point,  toward  the  end  of  the  conference,  did
the    Secretary   of    State   let   himself   go    and    risk   a   little
eloquent  pleading.  He  said   defensively—
We  are  not  talking  about  detente,-or  anything  else.  We
are  talking  about  whether  it  makes  sense  for  the  two  of
us  (US  and USSR)  to  continue  to  spend  immense  amounts
of  money  for  the  next  5,  10 or  15  years  on  strategic  weap-
ons  and end  up at  the  end of  that  time  in  the  same  relative
position—or  whether  it  would  be  wiser  to  use  the  money
for  some  other  purposes.
We   hope  this  will  not   lead   Agnew  to  regard   Rogers   as
effete,  or  Attorney  General  Mitchell  to  see  him  as  a  security
(Continued   On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Nov.  3, 1969
Policing  The  "Free World"  Now  Costs  Us  Some  $50 Billion  A  Year  . . .
We  support   the  Moratorium  and  we  support   the  Mobili-
zation.    One  is   moderate,   the   other   radical.   Both   are
needed.    The  task  of  door-to-door   persuasion   at  the  grass
roots   is  essential.   In   struggling   for   peace,  we    confront
some   of   man's   oldest   conditioned   reflexes.     To    eradicate
them  is  not  easy.   To  educate   the  country   on  the  Vietnam
war   and  its   origins  is  still  a  task   half-completed.      Only
persuasion  can  do  the  job,  and  in  seeking  to  persuade   we
practice  the  deepest   virtues  implicit  in  the  First  Amend-
ment.   Screaming  is  no  substitute.   Rock-throwing  is  not
a  form  of  revolutionary  activity;  it  is  only  another   form
of   childish  tantrum.   The   Mobilization,    and   the  March   of
Death,  a  form,  of  Morality   Play,  with  a  whole  nation  as
its   audience,   should   prove   the   most  impressive    peaceful
demonstration   Washington   has   ever   seen.    The    country
has  grown  sick   of  violence,  and   of  Vietnam  as  a  form   of
violence.  It   will  be  alienated   if   the  frustrated   and   foolish
in  our  own  ranks  (and  the  secret  police  provocateurs)  are
allowed   to  become  violent,  too,  and  act  out  in  the  streets
what  we deplore  in  Vietnam.
Imperialism  is  an  impolitic  word.   It  is  only  other  countries
which  are  imperialist.   One's  own  is  always  engaged  in  some
noble   crusade.    German    Imperialism   under   the   Kaiser   was
spreading   Kultur.   The   Czars   claimed   to  be  extending   the
mystic  sway  of  Moscow   as  the  Third   Rome,  and  their  Com-
munist  successors  carry  on  in  the  same  vein,  albeit  secularized.
France  had  a  mission  civilatrice,  and  Britain  "the  white  man's
burden".    Bolivar   long   ago    said    that    the   United    States
"plagued"   Latin   America   "in   the   name   of   liberty".   What
has  happened  overseas  since  World  War   II  is  only  an  exten-
sion   of   what   has   long   been   occurring   under   the   Monroe
Doctrine.   The  Greek  dictatorship  our  Sixth  Fleet  supports  is
a  Guatemala   extended  to  the  Eastern  Mediterranean,  and  the
oligarchy  we  bolster  in  Saigon  in  the  name  of  freedom  is  no
different   from  half   a  dozen   similar  regimes   under  our  wing
in  Latin  America.
1.2  Million  Men  Overseas
This  is  imperialism  and  it  is  expensive.    A  new  survey  by
Congressional  Quarterly  of  U.S.  commitments  abroad  adds  up
the   stupendous   figures.    In   September   of   this  year  we   had
1.2  million  military  personnel   stationed  abroad   (out   of   total
U.S.  armed  forces  of  3.46  million)   in.more  than  33  countries
and   foreign   possessions.   With   them   were   26,000   U.S.   ci-
vilians,   350,000   dependents   and   255,000   foreign   nationals
attached  to  U.S.  overseas  bases.   There  are  U.S.  military  mis-
sions  in  50  countries  and  we  maintain  2,270  military  installa-
tions  overseas   (not  including  Vietnam),   of  which  the  Penta-
As,   For  Example,   In  Greece?
"Great   patriots  of   past   generations  would   find   it
difficult   to   believe  that   Americans  would   ever   doubt
the  validity  of   America's  resolve  to  protect   free  men
from   .   .   .  attack  by  governments  that   depend   upon
force  to  control  their  people—governments  which  came
into  being  through  force  alone  and  continue  to  exist
by  force  alone  .  .  ."
—Vice   President   Agnew  attacking   the   Moratorium
at  a  $100-a-plate  GOP  dinner  in  New  Orleans   Oct.  19.
gon    designated    340    as   major   installations.    The    cost    is
difficult  to  arrive at.   The  Pentagon  figures  the  cost  of  all  U.S.
military   commitments   overseas   exclusive  of   Southeast   Asia
at   $15.1   billion   per  year.   It   puts  the   cost  of   the  Vietnam
war  at  $28  billion,  or  a  total  of  $43  billion,  somewhat   more
than  half   the  U.S.   military  budget.    Congressional  estimates
run  higher.   Senator  John  Sherman  Cooper  in  a  report  to  the
NATO  parliamentarians  last  November  estimated  our  NATO
commitments  alone  at  $12  to   $15  billion  annually  and   the
Vietnam  war  at  $30  to  $35  billion.  That  would  put  total  costs
in  the  $50  billion  range.
That  $50  billion  a  year  spent   at  home   could   in   10  years
wipe  out  poverty,  illiteracy, pollution,  racial  tension  and  much
of  the  crime  that  afflicts   us.   A  $500  billion  10-year  program
may  sound  like  a  lot  but  the  Pentagon  will  spend  a  good  deal
more  than  that  in  the  next  10 years.
These  imperial  commitments  and  their  cost  are  now  being
investigated   by   a   special   subcommittee   of   Senate    Foreign
Relations  under  Senator  Symington  of  Missouri.   It  will  cover
not   only  the   cost   of   military  commitments  but   of   the   aid
programs,   which  have  also  been   a  part  of   our   imperial  ex-
pansion   since  World   War   II.    U.S.   economic   and  military
aid  from  July  1,  1945,  to  July  1,  1968  totalled  $135.5  billion.
Much   of   the   money   went   to   reconstruct   war-torn   areas   in
Western  Europe   and   Asia,  and   some  of  it  has  been   put   to
good  use in  development   elsewhere.
But   entirely  too   much   has  gone   into   military  forces   and
hardware,  sparking  little  arms  races  around  the  world.   There
have  been   few  armed   conflicts  since  the  war   in  which   both
sides  did  not  fight  with  weapons  the  U.S.  supplied.   Of   the
total   in  aid  since  World  War   II,  $38.8  billion  is  listed  as
military—and  all  but  $2.8  billion  of  that  in  grants  not  loans.
But,   Congressional  Quarterly  points  out,  aid  labelled  economic
Fresh  Light  On  Our  Booming  Arms  Sales  to  the  Greek  Dictators  and  South   Africa
Mr.  Speaker,  I  think  my  colleagues   will  be  interested  in
several   sets   of   unclassified   arms   sales   figures   I   just
received  from  the  Department  of  Defense.
We  now  sell  arms  as  a  short-rank  expedient  to  solve  our
balance  of  payments problem, to  keep  the  munitions industry
booming,  and  to  appease  temporarily  the  demands  of  other
nations.   Yet   this   arms   sales   program   has   also   brought
down  friendly  governments,  bankrupted  treasuries, and  en-
couraged  the  outbreak  of  wars.
Several  points  are  apparent.  First,  it  is  with  some  sur-
prise  that  I  see  we  are  still  selling  arms  to  South Africa—
in  direct  contravention  of  our  own  arms  embargo  imposed
in  1963.  A  State  Department  spokesman   told  me  that   this
ban  is  still  rigidly  enforced.   Apparently  the  State  Depart-
ment  has  not  been  told.
Second,  it  is  also  of  interest  to  see  that  our  government
still  sells  arms to  the  United Arab  Republic. I  can  only  sur-
mise  that  this  equipment is  being  used  against  the  Israelis
whom  we  also  supply  with  arms.
Third,  our  arms  aid  to  the   Greek  dictatorship  in  fiscal
year  1969  is  almost  40  percent   more  than  we  sold  in  the
previous  6  years.  This  equipment will  no  doubt  be  used  to
stamp  out  whatever voices  of  freedom  remain at  large.
Finally   it   is  fascinating  to   note   the  countries—namely
Greece,   Iran,   Republic   of   China,   Thailand,  El   Salvador,
Chile  and  Morocco—where  our  level  of   aid   in   fiscal  year
1969   has  skyrocketed  compared  to  the  average, of  the  pre-
vious  6-year  period.  Are  we  doing  the  same  thing  to  Mor-
occo,   for   example,  that   we   did  in   Libya—deluging  them
with  arms   that   will  eventually  be  used  against   our  own
interests?
—Coughlin   (R.  Pa)  Congressional   Record  E8502  Oct.  15.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   Nov.  3, 1969
. . . What  We  Could  Do  At  Home  With  A  10-Year   $500  Billion  Program
has  sometimes  been  primarily  for  military  purposes:  "During
the   1950s,  for  example,  'economic'   aid  to  Laos  paid   for   the
entire  military  budget  in  that  country."  A  total  of  78  countries
have  received  U.S.  military  assistance  since  1950.    As  part  of
this  military  aid  program   "some  10,000  foreign  military  per-
sonnel  are  trained  annually by  the  U.S.  at  175  centers  in  this
country  and  at  other  locations  overseas."  The  training  includes
"counter-insurgency,"   i.e.  repressing  social  discontent  by  force.
Strange  "Frontiers  of   Freedom"
Our   own  rival  in  imperialism  is  the  Soviet   Uftion,   but  it
is  a  distant  second   in  the  power   struggle.    While  we   have
1.2  million  men  in  more   than   33  countries,   it  has   320,000
troops   stationed   outside   its   borders   in   four   East   European
countries.   The  Brehznev  doctrine  is  modelled  on  the  Monroe
Doctrine,  and  the  Caracas  corollary.   This  has  made  the  Rus-
sians  more  unpopular  than  any other  people  in  Eastern  Europe,
as  we   are  unpopular   in   "our"    part   of   the   world.    Just  as
Russia   stifles  liberalism  in  the   Soviet  bloc,   we  tend   to   stifle
it  in  many  of  the  countries  under  our  control.    Czechoslovakia
and  Greece  are  sisters  in  suffering.   The  military  on  both  sides
prefer  hard-line  regimes.    Truman   in  March,   1947,   pledged
the  U.S.  to  "support  free  peoples  who  are  resisting  attempted
subjugation  by  armed  minorities  or  by  outside  pressure."   In
Greece,   where  the  Truman   Doctrine  started,  as  in  Vietnam,
we  now  find  ourselves  supporting  armed  minorities  in  subju-
gating   the   majority,   non-Communist  and   Communist   alike.
The   "Frontiers   of  Freedom"  around  the  Eurasian  rim   from
Greece  through  Iran  to  Taiwan  are  manned  by  dictators.   Each
of  these  countries  is  a  potential  Vietnam.
Vietnam  may  end,  but  the  effort   to  police  the  world   goes
on.  Hardly  a  day  passes  without  some  story  from  the  Pentagon
about  budgetary  cuts  but  the  details  remain  suspiciously  vague.
Aviation  Week   for  Oct.  27  says  Nixon  has  approved   spending
levels  over  the  next five-year planning  period  at  the  Pentagon
of  $70  to  $75  billion  a  year.   If  the  new  level  for  the  next
five  years  assumes  an  end  of  the  Vietnam  war,  then  it  means
a  rise  of  40%   to  50%   from  the  level  of  fiscal  "65 just  before
Johnson   sent   in   combat   troops  and   Americanized   the   war.
Progress  of  Self-Determination    in  Saigon
President  Thieu's  moribund 6-party  "ruling  alliance",
touted  last  spring  as  a  move  to  "broaden"  South  Viet-
nam's  government,  lost  one  of  its   major  members  to-
day.   Trinh  Quoc  Khanh,  leader  of   the   Social   Demo-
cratic  party,  led  his  splinter  faction  of   the   Hoa  Hao
religious   sect  out   of   the   alliance,   asserting   that   the
President's  coalition  currently  "cannot  do  any  good  for
the  country."  .  .  .  The  political  alliance  that  the  Hoa
Hao  left   today   never  attracted   more  than   six  right-
wing  splinter   groups,  and  Mr.  Thieu  never  displayed
any  willingness  to  share  power  even  with  the  leaders  of
these  groups  .  .  .  The  inability  of  the  alliance  to  hold
one of  its  few  important members ...   can only add to the
Saigon  regime's   almost   total  reliance  on  the  military.
—Wood-ruff    from   Saigon  in  Baltimore   Sun  Oct.  25.
For  the  fiscal  year   ended   June   30,   1965,   the   total   budget
outlay   "by  function"   for   the  military  was  $49.5  billion.   A
post-Vietnam   level   of   $70   to   $75   billion   would   mean   a
stepup  of  from  $20  to  $25  billion.
These  figures   show   it   is  not   enough   just  to   get   out  of
Vietnam,   or   even   as  Mansfield   told   the   Senate   Oct.   20  to
get   out   of   Southeast   Asia   "lock,   stock   and    barrel"—after
neutralizing  it  with  an  international  agreement   in  which  the
Soviets  and  Communist  China  would  be  asked  to  join.  With-
out  a  major  shift   away  from  the   idea  of   a  Pax   Americana,
there  will  be  scant  resources  left  for  reconstruction  at  home.
It   is  imperialism  and   militarism  which   must   be   recognized
as  our  enemies.   The  Pentagon   is  fighting  a  rear  guard  action
on  bases  and  personnel,  as  it  is  on  Vietnam,  making  no  more
concessions  than  necessary  to  appease  public  opinion.   Richard
J.  Barnet   in  his  admirable  new  book  The   Economy   of   Death
(Atheneum:  $2.95)  concludes  that  the  militarization of  Amer-
ica  is  now  our  No.   1  national  security  problem   and  warns
that  after  Vietnam  "there  are  waiting  in  the  Pentagon   wings
13  major  new  weapons   systems  which  will  move  inexorably
toward   production   and   deployment   unless  the  juggernaut  is
stopped."   That   is  why  we  have   to   talk   of   militarism  and
imperialism  and  not  just  of  Vietnam.
Nixon's  Cry  of  "Character  Assassination" A Way to Smear Haynsworth's Critics
"The   President   charges    opponents   of   the   Haynsworth
nomination   with   'vicious   character   assassination.'    Person-
ally  and  on  behalf  of   the  AFL-CIO,  I  resent  this  charge.
The  AFL-CIO privately  conveyed  to  the  President—before
the   nomination—as   much   as   we   then   knew   about   the
Judge's   involvement  in  Carolina  Vend-A-Matic. The   Presi-
dent  ignored  our  plea.   The  President   has  attacked  'piece-
meal  disclosure'  of  Judge  Haynsworth's  financial  interests.
The  blame  for   this   lies   with   the   Judge   and  the  Justice
Department.
On  June  2,  before  the  Senate  subcommittee  on  Improve-
ments  in  Judicial  Machinery, the  Judge declared: 'Of  course,
when  I  went  on  the  bench  I  resigned  from  all  such   business
associations,   directorships   and  things   of   that   sort.'   The
Senate  hearings  have shown this  was  not true. Judge  Hayns-
worth  finally  admitted  that  he  was  not  only  a  director  of
Vend-A-Matic  but  a  vice-president  until  1963.  As  the  record
demonstrates,   approximately  half   of   his   wealth   was   in-
volved  in  Vend-A-Matic. He  owned  15  percent   of   the  com-
pany   which  became   a   valuable  investment   only   after   he
went  on  the  bench.
"Neither  the  Textile  Workers  Union  of  America  nor  ap-
parently  the  other  members  of  the  court  were  aware  of  the
Judge's  substantial  involvement  with  Vend-A-Matic. While
on   the   bench   he  continued  to   serve   as   a  vice-president,
attended   weekly  luncheon  meetings   of   the   directors  and
received  directors' fees.  He  was  a  trustee  of Vend-A-Matic's
pension  and  profit  sharing  plan  and  shared  responsibility  for
the  plan's  failure  to  comply  with  the  law  by  filing  annual
reports  with  the  Labor  Department. His wife  was  a Vend-A-
Matic   officer   for   two   years   while  he   was   on   the   bench
including  the  time when the  Darlington  decision  was  handed
down.
In  1957, when  he  went  on  the  bench,  Vend-A-Matic  gross
sales  were  $453,110.  In  1963  when  he  resigned   as  a  Vend-
A-Matic  official,  gross  sales  were  $3,160,665. For  an original
investment  of  approximately  $3,000  in  1950,  Judge  Hayns-
worth   received   $437,500   in   1964.  It   must   be  remembered
that  Vend-A-Matic was  dependent  upon  the  textile industry.
Darlington  was  a  key  case  in  the  industry's  battle  against
unionization  of  its  workers.  Judge  Haynsworth volunteered
none  of  these  connections   until  questioned   by  members  of
the   Judiciary   Committee.   Why   did   he   and   the   Justice
Department  conceal  the  size  of  his  financial  involvement  in
Carolina Vend-A-Matic?"
—Statement  by  George  Meany   (abridged)    Oct.  22.
6  *
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Nov.  3, 1969
After  Ten  Months  Still  No  Nixon  Negotiating  Position?
(Continued  From  Page    One)
risk.   Had   this  been  said  by  the  President  at  a  White  House
conference,  it  would  have  reverberated   in  the  headlines.  One
can only  conclude that  these  are headlines  Nixon  did  not want,
that  he  is  going  into  the  talks  half-heartedly.
Even  Undecided  On  MIRV
Apparently  after  ten  months  of  preparation,  the Administra-
tion  hasn't  even  decided   just  what  it  will  propose  in  these
talks.   The    Washington    Star    (Oct.    26)    quoted   unnamed
officials   as  saying  that  they   "expected  the  National   Security
Council  to  meet  soon  and  decide  exactly  what  should  be  pro-
posed   in  Helsinki."  This  would  explain  why  Rogers  was  so
vague  and  cautious.  He  declined  even  to  say what  was  meant
by  "strategic  arms."  He  evaded  a  question  as  to  whether  there
was   "any   thought   on   our   part   of   proposing   some   sort  of
limitation  on  anti-ballistic missiles."  When  asked  whether  the
U.S.  might  begin  by proposing  a mutual freeze  on  MIRV  test-
ing,"   he  termed  that  "a  complex  subject"  and  added,   "now
that  the  talks  are  scheduled  to  start  on  the  17th,  why  we  will
consider  how  we will  approach  that  subject."  He  indicated  the
main  lines  of  the  U.S.  approach  when  he  said  we  hoped   (1)
"to  negotiate  an  arms  limitation  agreement   which  will   keep
us  in  the  same  relative position,"   i.e.  securely  ahead  and   (2)
to  be  sure  the   agreement   could   be  "verified,   because   if   it
can't  and  one  side  can  cheat,  then  it  certainly is  not  a  viable
agreement."
"Verification"  has  long   been   the  main  ploy  for   dragging
out  arms  talks  interminably. The   negotiations  for  an  under-
ground  test  ban,  now  in  their  ninth  year  in  Geneva  with  no
end  in  sight,  are  an  example.  We  spend  billions on  "verifica-
tion"   via  seeing-eye  satellites,  flying  hearing  devices,  and   a
wide  variety  of  exotic  sensors,  smellers  and   sniffers.   All   the
Pentagon   asks  in  this  imperfect   world   is  the  absolute   fool-
proof.   If  marriages  were  concluded  only  after   the  kind  of
guarantees  against  cheating  required  by  our  arms  negotiators,
the  population  explosion  would  soon  be  ended   by  universal
celibacy.
Perhaps  one  reason  the  Nixon  Administration  is  so  unen-
thusiastic  about  these  talks  is  that  Nixon   thought,   as  Dulles
did   years  ago,   that   the  pressure  of  the   arms  race  could   be
Oh
"Administration    officials   have   emphasized    that   the
President   did  not   mean   that  he  would  take  no  notice
of  the  protests  but  rather   that  he  had  a  detailed  plan
for  settling  the  war  in  Vietnam  and  could  not  alter   the
plan  because  of  demonstrations."
—New  York  Times  from   Washington,  Oct.  20.
used   to  exact  political  concessions  from   the   Russians.  This
may  have  been  part  of  that  still  secret  "plan"  he  announced
during  his  election  campaign  last  year  to  end  the  Vietnamese
war.    At  his  first  press  conference  as  President   he  said   he
wanted  to  have  "strategic  arms  talks  in  a  way  and  at  a  time
that  will  promote,  if  possible,  progress  on  outstanding  politi-
cal  problems."  But  when  Rogers  was  asked  whether  the  initi-
ation  of  the  arms  talk  would  "affect  the  pattern  of   East-West
relations"  he  broke  in  to  say, "They  are  not  conditional  in  any
sense  of  the  word.  We  haven't  laid  down  any  conditions  for
these  talks."
Why,  then,  is  the  Nixon  Administration entering  the  talks
at  all ? One  reason  is  that  ratification  of  the  Nuclear   Non-Pro-
liferation  Pact  is  lagging  badly.  The   non-nuclear  powers   are
waiting  to  see  whether  the  nuclear  superpowers  are  going  to
take  seriously  their  obligations   under  Article  VI.  This   obli-
gates  them  to  negotiate  "cessation  of   the  nuclear  arms  race
at  an  early  date  and  to  nuclear  disarmament,  and  on  a  treaty
on  general and  complete  disarmament."  Rogers  said we  had  an
obligation  "under  NPT   treaty"  to  negotiate.   He  did  not  add
that  it  was  an  obligation  to  do  more  than  merely  "curb"  the
nuclear  arms  race.  Most  Americans  have  forgotten—and  both
Washington   and   Moscow   probably   prefer   to   forget—that
eight  years  ago  in  a  joint  declaration  to  the  United  Nations,
Kennedy  and  Khrushchev   pledged  themselves  on  the  basis  of
the  McCloy-Zorin agreement  to general  and  complete disarma-
ment,  with  the  elimination  "of  all  stockpiles  of  nuclear,  chemi-
cal,  bacteriological  and   other   weapons   of   mass   destruction"
and   "all   means  of   delivering"   them   so  that  war   could   no
longer  be  "an  instrument  for  settling.international  problems."
That  was  eight  years  and  several  hundred  billion  dollars   ago.
We've certainly made rapid  progress—backwards.          Oct.  26
We    Urge   New  York   Readers  to  Vote   For  Lindsay
FOR  STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name
Street
City
Indicate  if
Please  renew   (or
Street
City
I.
4420  29th   St.
Zip
gift   announcement
enter)  a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  Q
the   enclosed   $5:
State
F.  Stone's  Weekly                   11/3/69
N. W.,  Washington,   D.C.  20008
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,  N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   Zd Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at   4420  29th  St..   N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly  published and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription: ?5  in  the  U.S.;  $6  in  Canada;
$10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED