I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969jun16.pdf

============================================================

Testing  the Constitutionality  of  A  Peace-Time Draft,  P.  2
Words  to  Be  Engraved  on  Stuffed  Shirts,   Bald  Pates  and  Nixon's   Attorney  General
"A  society  that  hates  its   young  people  has  no  future."
—Fred   Dutton,   the   only   member  of   the   University   of      von  Hoffman,    the  Washington  Post's  newest  and  most  per-
California's    Board   of  Regents   to  side  with  the  students,     ceptive  columnist, June  2.  "I  see  the  older  society,"   Dutton
the  street  people  and  Berkeley's  "People's  Park",  to Nicholas     told  him,  "beating  up  kids  for  no  reason  at  all."
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly                   *^
VOL  XVII,  NO.  12
JUNE  16,  1969
101
      WASHINGTON, D.C.20  CENTS
Midway  To  A  Nguyen  Van  Nixon  Era
Two  decades  ago  Karl  Mundt   and   Richard  Nixon   were
comrades  in  arms on  the  House  Un-American  Activities  Com-
mittee.   Long  before  Joe  McCarthy,   they  were  our   foremost
practitioners  of  McCarthyism.   When   Nixon  said  at   Beadle
State  College  in  South  Dakota   on  his  way  to  Midway,   "In
public  life,  we have  seen  reputations  destroyed  by  smear  .  .  .
We  have  heard  ...     sly  voices  of  malice,  twisting  facts"  he
was  providing  a  perfect  description  of  their  own  activities  in
those  years.  A  satirist,  seeking  savagely to  caricature  America,
could  not  have  done  better  than  Nixon  preaching  the  virtues
of  a  free  society  at  a  ceremony  dedicating  a  library  named  for
Mundt.   The  only  time Mundt  ever  came  close  to  a  book  was
to  see whether  or  not  it  might  have  been  written  by  a  Red.
Their  main  achievement was the  creation,  for  the  first  time  in
our  history,   of  an   official   agency  designed  to  police  public
thinking.   Their  Mundt-Nixon  bill,  fathered  up  a  dark  alley
by  the  U.S.  Chamber  of  Commerce,  was  fought  as  unconsti-
tutional   by  conservative  leaders   of   the   American   bar   and
opposed  by  Tom  Clark,  then  Attorney  General.    It  was  ve-
toed  by President  Truman  as  an  attempt  at  "thought  control."
The  Old Nixon  Still  Here
Thanks   to  the  anti-Red  hysteria  which  marked  the  early
months  of  the  Korean  war,  Congress  passed  it  over  his  veto.
It  created  a  Subversive  Activities  Control  Board  —  the  very
name  is  redolent  of  Inquisition  rather  than  free  society  —  but
Supreme  Court  decisions  have  left  it  an  empty  shell.   It  was
supposed  to  set  up  a  blacklist  of  Reds,  to  force  them  to  put
a  Scarlet  Letter  label  on  their  publications  and  broadcasts,  and
to  deny them  the  right  to  travel  abroad.   All  these  efforts  have
been  struck down  as  unconstitutional.   The  SACB  is  a  ghostly
reminder  of  the  Fascistic  ideas  which  were written  into  Amer-
ican   law  under  the   guise  of   fighting   Communism.    Mundt
and  Nixon  were  a  long  way  from   Jefferson   in  those  years.
There  is little  reason  to  believe  them  much  closer  today,  when
Nixon   has  appointed   three  heroes  of   the  witch-hunters  to
key  posts:  Burger,  the  defender  of  "faceless  informer"  testi-
mony,  to  be  Chief  Justice;   Roger   Robb,  the  prosecutor  of
J.   Robert   Oppenheimer,  to  the   Court   of   Appeals   for   the
District  of  Columbia;  and  Otto  Otepka,  the  pet  State  Depart-
ment  stoolpigeon  of  Congressional   Inquisitors  like  Eastland,
to  a  $36,000  a  year  job  on  the  Subversive Activities  Control
Board.   It  may  be  no  accident  that  Nixon's  little  lecture  on
We  Still   Want  A  Saigon  Under  Our  Control
"If  we  have  in  mind  to  create  a  Vietnamese  govern-
ment  headed  by  the  two  Generals, and  to  support  them
as  our  sort  of  representatives  there  —  I  don't  like  to
use  the  word  puppet,  it  is  a  prejorative  word  —  but  in
any  case  the  idea that  they  are  our  friends  and  we  are
going  to  keep  them  in  power  by  giving  them  an  un-
limited  amount  of   support  and  weapons  —  of  course,
you  would  get   no  political  settlement.   And  to  with-
draw  50,000  troops  as  just  sort  of  a  guise  of  making
progress,  but  to  make  no change  in  our attitude toward
what  we  are  going  to  leave  there  will  not  result  in  a
settlement  ...      I  do  not  believe  it  is  in  the  national
interest   of  the  United  States  to  maintain  a  base  in
South  Vietnam  whether  it  be  directly  under  our  occu-
pation  or  whether  it  be by proxy .  .  .  The actions would
indicate  to   me  that  we  are  planning   to  continue   to
control  South  Vietnam  by  proxy.   Obviously  Mr. Thieu
does  not  want  any  change in  the  status  quo;  he  wants
us  to  stay  right  there  with  our  troops  and  pay  all  the
bills."
—Sen.   Fulbright    before     the   Proxmire   committee
hearings  on  "The  Military  Budget  and  National  Eco-
nomic  Priorities."  Fulbright   made  a  magnificent    wit-
ness. June  4.
freedom  never  once  mentioned   the  Bill  of  Rights.
Nixon  had  to  find a  very out-of-the-way college  to  get  away
with  a  commencement  address  which  claimed  for  itself   "the
honesty  of straight  talk"  without  saying  a word  about  the  war.
He  also  had  to  be a  long  way from  nowhere  to  get  away  with
his  description  of  black  demands  for  open  admission  to  such
schools  at  New  York's  City  College.  "Instead   of  seeking  to
raise lagging  students up  to meet the college  standards,"  Nixon
said,  "the  cry  now  is  to  lower  the  standards  to  meet  the  stu-
dents.  This  is  the  old  familiar self-indulgent  cry  for  the  easy
way."    This   was   extraordinarily   insensitive.    Whatever   its
merits,   the   demand  for   open   enrollment   for   graduates  of
ghetto  high  schools  is  hardly  a  form  of  self-indulgence.   On
the  contrary it  reflects  the  desire of  the blacks fortunate enough
to  be  in  college  to  open  the  doors  wider to  the  less  fortunate,
and   to  force  better   teaching   in  ghetto  high   schools.    The
C.C.N.Y.  proposals,   for   example,   are  only  a  more  modest
variant  of  the  open  enrollment  to  all  high  school  graduates
which  exists  in  many  State  colleges.*   It  was  unfair   so  to
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  16,  1969
NIXON'S  Am  FORCE  ACADEMY SPEECH makes  the  fight  against
the  draft  more  urgent.   One  way  to  prevent  an  attempt  at  a
Pax Americana is to deny  the government  the right  to  conscript
soldiers  in  peace-time.   This  question,  as  Mr.  Justice  Douglas
pointed   out   in   a  comprehensive   dissent   in   a   conscientious
objector   case  last  year  (Holmes   v.   17.5.  391  U.S.  936),   has
never  been  decided  by  the  Supreme  Court.   Significantly  Mr.
Justice   Stewart,   who  wrote   the   Court's  opinion   denying  a
hearing  in  that  case  said  he  would  have  voted  with   Douglas
if  it  had  involved  "the  power,  in  the  absence  of  a  declaration
of   war,   to   compel   military   service   in   armed    international
conflict  overseas."   This  augurs  well  for  the  test  case  which
the  American  Gvil  Liberties  Union  has just filed in New  York
on  behalf  of  David  Peter  Zimmerman,  who  refused  induction
and  challenged  a  peace-time  draft  as  unconstitutional.   The
ACLU's   172-page   brief   by  Leon   Friedman   and   others   in
support  of  its  motion   to  dismiss   is  a  monumental   work  of
legal  and  historical  scholarship.
From   1789   to   1940,   the  draft   had  been   used   for   only
four  years,  once  in  the  Gvil  War  and  again  in  World  War  I.
In  World  War  I,  it  is  timely  to  recall,  it  was  used  not  only
to  raise  troops  but  to  repress  criticism;  critics  of  the  war  went
to  jail  for  "obstructing   the  draft."   Our  first  peace-time   draft
law  was passed  in  1940,   on  the  assurance  of  its  sponsors  that
it  was  not  to  be  a  "permanent   policy."   It  has  been  with  us
ever  since.   The  new  Chief  Justice  is  advertised   as  a  "strict
constructionist."    The  ACLU  brief   shows  that,  strictly   con-
strued,  the  Constitution  provides  no  basis  for  a  draft,  even  in
war-time.   The  brief  quotes  from  the  debates  on  the  Consti-
tution  remarks  by  Madison,   its  principal  framer,  which   are
remarkably  apposite   today.    "The   means  of   defense   against
foreign  danger,"  Madison  said,  "have  always  been  the  instru-
ments  of  tyranny  at  home  .  .  .  Throughout  all  Europe  the
armies  kept  up  under  the  pretext  of  defending  have  enslaved
the  people."
IF   "STRICT  CONSTRUCTION"  were  a  real  concern,  the   Senate
Judiciary  Committee  would  have  have  grilled  Burger  sharply
on  one  item  in  his  past  to  which  Drew  Pearson's   Merry-Go-
Round   called   attention   (April   5,  1955).   Burger,   then   an
Assistant  Attorney  General,   invited  12  newsmen  to   an  off-
the-record  lunch  to  build  up  public  support  for  the   "faceless
The   Case   For   Nationalizing   Arms    Industry
"Where  a  corporation does  all  (or  nearly  all)  of  its
business  with  the  Dept.  of  Defense;  uses   much  plant
owned  by  the  government; gets  its  working  capital  in
the  form  of  progress  payments  from  the  government;
does  not  need  to  worry  about  competitors  for  it  is  the
sole  source  of  supply  .  .  .  only  the  remarkable flexi-
bility   of   the   English   language   allows   us   to   call   it
private  enterprise  .  .  .  General  Dynamics,  Lockheed,
North-American   Rockwell  and  such  are  public  exten-
sions  of  the  bureaucracy  .  .  .  Perhaps  one  day  soon  a
further  step  should be  taken.   Perhaps  any  firm  which,
over  a  5-year  period,  has  done  more  than  75%  of   its
business   with   the  Defense   Dept.,  should  be   made  a
full  public  corporation . . . The action would  ensure that
such  firms  are  held  to  strict  standards   of   public  re-
sponsibility  in  their  political and  other activities."
—John  Kenneth  Galbraith  to  the  Proxmire  commit-
tee  June  3. Text  in  Con. Rec. June  5 p. S  6305.
informer"  case  he  was  about  to  argue  in  the  Supreme  Court.
The  ethics  of  this   effort  to   argue  the  case  out   of  court   is
questionable,  and  the  point  itself  is fundamental.   What  could
be  more  basic  than  the  right  to  face  one's  accusers?  Burger
told  the  newsmen  the  attack  on  "faceless  informers"  was  Com-
munist-inspired.   The  Court  held  against  him.   We  hope  the
precedent  is  not  reversed  some  day  by  a  new  Nixon  majority.
Senators  Nelson,   Young   (Ohio)  and  McCarthy  deserve  ap-
plause   for   voting   against   confirmation,  and   Fulbright    for
abstaining.
FROM  1964  UNTIL  HIS ASSASSINATION last  year,  Martin  Luther
King's  telephone  was  tapped  by  the  FBI.   This  revelation  in
the   Cassius  Clay  trial  was  followed   a  few  days  later  by  a
Justice  Department   statement  claiming   that  J.  Edgar  Hoover
told  the  truth  when  he  testified  annually  in  the  House  ap-
propriations  hearings  1965-68  that  all  such  taps  were  author-
ized  in  advance and  in  writing  by the  Attorney  General.   This
has  now   been  denied   by  former   Attorney  General   Ramsey
Clark  in  an  interview  with  the  Los  Angeles  Times   (Washing-
ton  Post,  June  8).   Mr.  Clark  denied   ever  authorizing  taps
either  of  Dr.   King  or  of  Elijah  Muhammed,   leader  of   the
Black  Muslims.   He  called  the  implication  that  Dr.  King  was
a  security  risk  "outrageous."  Hoover  hated  King,  and  leaked
The  Man  and  The  Regime  We  Support  in  Saigon  in  The  Name  of   Self-Determination
"Saigon,  June  1—A  broad  spectrum of  South Vietnamese
politicians  believe  that  the  present government of  President
Thieu  is  too  weak,  too  narrow,  too  inept  and  too  corrupt
to  compete successfully  for  power  with  the  National Libera-
tion  Front.   Aside  from  the  U.S.  mission  and  Thieu's  close
military  allies,  the  prevailing  political  mood  ranges   from
deep  anxiety  to  outright  pessimism.   Interviews  with  the
most  important political  parties, fronts  and  religious   blocs
did  not  turn  up  a  single  individual  who  believed  that   the
present  Thieu  government  could  win  in  any  reasonably  fair
and  open political  competition  with  the Communists  .  . . The
pervading  negative  feeling  over  the  Thieu   government   is
surprising,  for  it  includes  political  leaders who have recently
joined  his  new  ruling  alliance.
"There  is  agreement  that  the  government  is  supported
on  much  too  narrow  a  political  base,  that  it  has  no  real
ties  with  the  majority  of  peasants  in  the  countryside and
the  growing  number of  workers and restless  urbanites  .  .  .
No  one gives  credit  to  the  government  for  any  serious  effort
to   stop   corruption.    Top  military   leaders  in   general   are
singled  out  as  the  group  committing the  worst  violations.
There   is   indignation   over   the   belief   that   these  military
figures are  the  most  'untouchable' in  the  government .  .  .
The  pessimists  .  .  .  claim  that  many  officials,  particularly
the  military,  are  grabbing  money  now  to  build  up  reserves
or  get  out  of  the  country.
"They  believe that  President  Thieu is  permanently marred
because   he  fought  for  the   French,  the  Diem  regime  and
then  for  the  Americans.   These  politicians,  largely  from  or
tied   to   such   groups  as   the   Buddhists,  the   Cao  Dai,   the
Hoa   Hao   and  southern-centered,  are   outspoken  in  their
view  that  a  northerner,  a   Catholic  and  a   former  French
ally,  such  as  Thieu,  can  never  gain  the  support  of  South
Vietnam's  vast  peasantry  .  .  .  They  simply  do  not  regard
him  as  a  real  nationalist .  .  .  Almost all  are highly critical
of  the  1967 elections  which  brought  Thieu  to  power.  They
regard   them   as   an  exercise   for   the   benefit   of  American
public  opinion  ...     a  'farce'  or  something  close  to  it."
—Peter  J.  Kumpa  in  the  Baltimore  Sun  June  2.  Kumpa
is  a  correspondent  of   long   experience  in  Southeast   Asia.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/. F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  16,1969
slanderous  stories  about  him.   But  I  doubt  if  there  is  a  single
person  in  Congress  with  the  courage  to  call  him  to  account.
The  U.S.  suffers  from  its  own  "cult  of  personality"  and  the
FBI  chief  is  a law  unto  himself.
EVERY   WESTERN   INTELLECTUAL  who   has   been   friendly   to
the   Soviet  Union   owes  an  obligation   to  protest   the  steady
reversion  to  Stalinism  in  that  unhappy  land.   I  want  to  call
attention  to  an  interview  in  the  London  Sunday  Times   (May
25)   with  Anatole  Shub,  who  has  just  been  expelled  as  the
Washington  Post  correspondent   in  Moscow.   He  disclosed  that
Larissa  Daniel,  wife  of  the  dissenting  writer,   himself   in  a
detention   camp  since   1966,   is  being   subjected  to   barbarous
treatment  in  a  Siberian  labor  camp  about   150  miles  west  of
Bratsk.   Her  health  is  threatened  by the  heavy  timber  work  to
which  this  frail  woman  has  been  assigned.   Her  crime  is  that
she  and  half  a  dozen  others  had  the  courage  to   demonstrate
against   the   Soviet   invasion   of   Czechoslovakia.    Ten   brave
intellectuals  have  just  appealed  to  the  World  Communist  con-
ference  in  Moscow  against  the  increasing  number  of  dissenters
being  punished   by  incarceration  in  insane  asylums.   Write  a
letter,   boycott  a  reception,   insult  the   next   Soviet   bureaucrat
you  meet.  Do  something.  Russia  is  becoming  a  prison  again.
ADD   CONGLOMERATES:   Wm.   W.   Hancock,   former   Deputy
General   Counsel   of   the   Air   Force,   has   just   been   named
General  Counsel  of  the  U.S.  Arms  Control  and   Disarmament
Agency. • Why   not   move   the   ACDA   over   to   the   Pentagon
altogether?    IN  A  POLL  of  its  80,000  scientists   and   engineer
readers,   Industrial  Research  (May)   asked  whether   "there  is
any  'ultimate'  ABM  system  capable  of  complete   protection?"
89%   replied   "No."     The  magazine  itself   in  its  April   issue
came  out  against  the  ABM  calling  it  "obsolete  and  unneces-
sary"  and  declaring  it  "could  initiate  a  new  arms  race."  Is
THIS  JOURNALISM  DEFT ? When  9  Senators  and  36  Representa-
tives   issued   a  joint   report   warning   against   the   "increasing
militarization  of  our  society",  most  papers   (June  2)  put  the
story  on  page  one,  but  the  New  York  Times  that  day  led  the
front   page  with   a  piece  of   puffery,   "Pentagon   Moving   to
Reduce  Waste  in  Arms  Projects."   It  contained  no  hard  news
and  was no  better  than  a  public  relations  ploy  to  blanket  the
Congressional  protest  which  was  relegated  to  page  19.
Unexpected  Testimonial  to  SDS
Mr.  Edwards  (D.  La.  former  chairman  of  HUAC)—
What  is  the  effect,  good  or  bad,  on  the  other  students
...     of  SDS on the campus?
Mr.  (Thos.  M.)  Sneeringer   (a  Junior  at Georgetown,
who  prepared  a  report on SDS for the Committee) .  .  .
More  cognizance  of  ...      the  oppression  of  the  lower
classes  ...     A  growing  proportion of  the  student  body
is  becoming activated  . . .  They do agree  when the SDS
says  something is  wrong here.
Mr.  Edwards —  Do  you  think  a  majority of  the  stu-
dents  at  Georgetown think  there  is  something  sick  or
wrong  with  our  society?
Mr.  Sneeringer  —  Maybe  "sick"  isn't  the  right  word,
but  you  can't  help  but  think  there  is  something  wrong
when  you see  there  are ghettoes  . .  . The effect  of SDS
is  to  have  students  become  more  aware  of  these   de-
ficiencies.
Mr.  Edwards —  ...     as  a  result  of  these   hearings
I  have  been  shocked  out  of  complacency.  A  fellow  like
(Barry)  Rubin  (an  SDS  leader  at  Georgetown)  talking
to  you,  I  thought, would  end up with  "here  is  a  radical
nut  that  doesn't  understand or  appreciate my  country."
I  was  sailing  through  my  peaceful  existence  thinking
98  percent  of  the  students  know  better  than  that,  and
that  the  two  percent  should  be  kept  from  hurting  any-
body.  They  are so out of  line  .  .  .  that  the  rest  of  the
good  guys  will  put  them  in  their  place  before   long.
Apparently  I  am  in  error.
—House  Internal   Security   hearing  on  SDS   June  5.
NEW    PITY-THE-POOR    PENTAGON    LINE:   The     Washington
Post  said  in  an  editorial  May  30  that  current  onslaughts   on
the   military  were   "uncomfortably   reminescent   of   Joe   Mc-
Carthy's  sly  attacks  on  the  State  Department."   The  parallel
would  fit  if  a  new  demagogue  were  accusing  the  Joint  Chiefs
of  being  infiltrated  by  pacifists.   When  that  day  comes,  we'll
be  happy  to  leap  to  their  defense.
PAGING  SUETONIUS:  Nixon,  according  to  a  Society  Page  item
{Washington  Post,  June  8)  plans  to  cut  up  'the  cork  flooring
in  the  White  House  where  Eisenhower  left  cleat  marks  from
his  golf  shoes,  and  give  the  pieces  out  as  souvenirs.   Whether
they  "will  be  framed  behind  glass  or  simply  -be sent  out  in
gift   boxes  has  not   been   decided."   We  hope   somebody   is
saving  Nixon's  toe-nail  parings  for  posterity.
How  the  Pentagon's  Drive  Toward  First  Strike  Capacity  May  Escalate  the  Arms  Race
Sen.  SYMINGTON  —  If  Secretary  Laird  says  that  this
Poseidon  development could  "improve  significantly   the  ac-
curacy  of  the  Poseidon  missile,  thus  enhancing  its  effective-
ness  against  hard targets  [like  missile  bases]  does  that not
imply  if  it  does  not  actually  state,  that  the  U.S.  is  going
after  a  first-strike  capability?
Mr.   SCHULTZE  (former  U.S.  Budget  Director)—  .  .  .
clearly  this  does  pose  in Soviet eyes  the  possibility  of taking
them  out  preemptively. Now  I  find  it  impossible  to  believe
that  any  sane  man  deliberately  would  build  a  first  strike
capability  .  . .  The real  problem  is  the  other  guy  has  got  to
assume   once   you  have  the  capability  he  has   to  prepare
against  it  ...      Continually  advancing  technology  and the
risk  aversion  of  military  planners  combine  to  produce  ever
more  complex and expensive weapon systems  and  ever more
contingencies  to  guard against.  Let  me give  some examples.
According   to   Dr.   Foster,   Deputy  Director  of   Defense
Research  and  Engineering  in  testimony  before  the  Senate
Armed  Services  Committee  last  year,  the  Poseidon  missile
system   was   originally   designed   to   penetrate   the   Soviet
TALLINN  system  —  a  system  originally  thought  to  be  a
widespread  ABM  defense.   When this  system  turned  out  to
be   an   anti-aircraft   system,   the   deployment  decision   on
Poseidon  was  not  revised  .  .  .  The sequence  went  like  this:
(1)  The  Poseidon decision was  made  against  a  threat which
never  materialized; (2)  ...      Poseidon  was  continued, pre-
sumably  as  a  hedge  against  other  potential threats, includ-
ing   faster-than-expected  Soviet   deployment  of   the   SS-9;
(3)  but  now a  decision  has  been  niade to  hedge  against  the
SS-9    by  building  a  'hard-point'  ABM  —  so   we  are  pre-
sumably  building  the  Poseidon  as  a  hedge  against  a number
of   possible  Soviet  threats,  including   the   SS-9,   and  then
building  a  hedge  on  top  of  that;  (4)  finally  new  technology
has  made  it  possible  to design  a  hard target  killing accuracy
[i.e.  to use it  as  a first strike weapon against  Soviet  ICBMS-
IFS]   —   an  accuracy  not  needed  to  preserve  our  second
strike  capability  against  the  SS-9 or a  Soviet  ABM .  . . The
existence  of  that  capability  may  well  force  a  major  Soviet
response.
—Proxmire  Hearings  on  The  Military  Budget  June  S.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  16,  1969
Little  Hope  of  Arms  Control  II
(Continued  From Page  One)
misrepresent  black  demands  in  that  far  away  lily-white forum.
If  "passionate concern,"  as Nixon  said,  "gets  nowhere without
dispassionate  analysis",  it  was  his  obligation  to  speak  soberly
of  his  own  plans  for  higher  education.   But  that  would  have
gotten  him  back  to  the  war,  and  the  whole  web of  lies  would
come  apart  if  one  strand  were  treated  honestly.
A  Billy  Graham  With  Brass  Knuckles
Nixon's  commencement  address  next  day  at  .the  Air   Force
Academy  was  another  example  of  his  tendency  to  sound  like
Billy  Graham  while  practising  the  below-the-belt  in-fighting
he  perfected  in  the  House  of  Representatives.   The  real  issues
now  raising  a  storm  in  Congress  over  military  spending   and
military  power  cannot  be  seriously  discussed  with  a  man  who
talks  of  "unilateral  disarmers"  and  "neo-isolationists."   This
is  the  old  smear-and-run tactics of  the  old  Nixon.   The  speech
was  low  demagogy,  full  of  non-sequiturs  and  floosy  historical
analogies.   But  what  it  said  is  clear  enough.    Nixon   is  de-
termined  to  pursue  the  course  of  the  Pax  Americana.   This
means  no  reduction  in  military  spending  or  military  power,
and  it  reveals,  as  in  a  lightning  flash,  how  illusory  it  is  to
expect  any  move  toward  disarmament  from  this  Administra-
tion.   He  speaks  rather  of  "control  of  arms"  and  only  "in  the
context  of  other  specific  moves  to  reduce  tension  around  the
world."   That  is  the  old  Dulles  dream  of   forcing   political
concessions  as  the  price  of  arms  negotiations.
The  Air  Force  speech   is  the  best  key  to  the  charade  on
Midway  Island.   A  President  who  believes  that  the  U.S.  must
be  the  world's  policeman  is headed  for  more  Vietnams,  and  is
unlikely  (as  he said)  to  accept a  "disguised  defeat"  in  getting
out  of  this  one.   The  token  withdrawal,  which  may  prove  to
be  largely support  or  kitchen  troops,  is  aimed  to  appease  and
mislead  opinion  at  home.  The  best  guide  to the  realities  lies  in
the  astringent  comments  of  the  .two  Senators  closest   to   the
military.  Russell said the  withdrawal of  25,000  men  "is  of  no
great  significance" and  "will  not  substantially reduce American
casualties."  Stennis said  he had  no  "high hopes" that the  South
Nixon  Pursues  A  Pax  Americana
On  Reagan  —  Conqueror  of  the  Peoples  Park
"Episcopal   Bishop  C.  Kilmer   Myers  described Gov-
ernor   Ronald  Reagan  yesterday  as  'the  one  who  has
unleashed  the dogs  of  war in  Berkeley  ...     a  full  scale
military  operation  replete with  strong-armed and brutal
methods  which  I  as  a  student  observed  in  Germany  in
1939.'  ...      'It  is  no  longer  sufficient   to  say  that  the
police  and the  military  have  "over-reacted."  The  charge
of  violation of  the  law,  both  eivil  and  moral,  must  be
laid  at  their  feet  rather  than  at  the  feet  of  the  helpless.
We  remember  that  this  is  the  same  Governor  who  ad-
vocated  paving  over  of  Vietnam.  He  is  a  warmonger
in   Southeast  Asia  and  he   is   a  warmonger  in   Cali-
fornia.   The  system  of  violence  which  spawns  persons
like  the  Governor  of  California  is  all  of  one  piece.'"
—San  Francisco  Chronicle May  36.
'Including,   as   I   learned  by  phone,  Beadle  State   itself.
Vietnamese  army  would  soon  be  able  to  take  over  the  war.
If  Nixon  has  his  way  we  may  keep  troops   in  Vietnam  in-
definitely  as  we  have  in  Korea  and  Western  Europe  to  man
"the  frontiers of  freedom."
This  is  the  meaning  of  Pax  Americana  and  if  it  leads  to
unrest  at  home,  he  is  ready  for  it.  "We  have  the  power   to
strike  back  as need'be,"  he  said  at  Beadle  State.   "The  nation
has  suffered  other  attempts  at  insurrection."   Though  he  pro-
claims  an  era  of  negotiation  abroad,  he  is  preparing  for  con-
frontation   at  home.   That   helicopter   spraying  50  pounds  of
CS  gas   indiscriminately  over   campus  demonstrators,   nearby
elementary   schools   and   hospital   facilities   in   the   Berkeley
Peoples'  Park  clash  may be  a preview  of  what  can  be  expected
elsewhere.  Reagan,  the  National  Guard  and  the  police  treated
fellow  Americans with  the  mindless  and  mechanical  brutality
we  mete  out  in  Vietnam.   We  are  beginning  to  repeat  here
all  the  errors  we  made  there.  Nixon  is  as  little  responsive  to
his  opposition  as Thieu  is  to his.  Thieu  returned  from Midway
so  emboldened   that  he  held  a  press  conference   threatening
that  anyone  who  even  advocated  a  coalition  with  the   NLF
would  be  "severely  punished."   Instead  of  spreading   freedom
to  Vietnam,  Nixon  may  soon  be  reducing  it  here.  Instead  of
de-Americanizing  the  war,  we  are  beginning   to   Vietnamize
America.   We  may  be  moving  toward  a  Nguyen  Van  Nixon
era,  combining  the  worst  of  both  regimes.                      June  9
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send A  Sample  Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send A  Long  Stamped  Addressed Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment (Random House) regular  price  {7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate  if
Please  renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.
4420  29th   St.
Zio  ..
gift   announcement
enter)  a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  Q
the   enclosed
fitaro
$5:
F.  Stone's  Weekly                   e/ie/69
N. W.,  Washington, D. C.  20008
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
4420  29th  St.,   N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
(Note  Corrected Address)
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington.  D. C.    P  ublished   every   other   Monday   at   4420   29th   St..   N.  W..   Washington,   D. C
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone:  Circulation Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.;   $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  S17 to  Europe;  S20  to  Israel. Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED