I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969apr21.pdf

============================================================

The  Right  to Selective and  Secular  C. O. Status, P.  2
Maybe  Laird's  Succeeded  in  Initiating  Secret  Talks  With  Himself
"Washington,   April   3—Defense   Secretary   Laird   said
today   that   secret   talks   aimed  at   settling   the   Vietnam
war  were  under  way  and  had  shown  'some  sign  of  prog-
ress.' "
—New  York Times, April  4
"Nixon   Administration   and   South  Vietnamese  sources
now  claim they  have  a  new  and  united  negotiating position
ready  for  secret  peace  talks  in  Paris.   But  these  sources
concede   that   no   actual   bargaining  with   the   Communist
side  has  yet   started."                 —Washington Post  April  5
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi-Weeklv                   *^
VOL.   XVII,  NO.  8
APRIL   21,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON, D. C.20  CENTS
The  Best  Kept  Secret  of  the  Vietnam  War
It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  document   less  candid   and   more
opaque  than  Gen.  Westmoreland's   report  on  the  Vietnamese
war.   He  was  in  command  in  the  years  of  its  greatest  escala-
tion,  and  his  account  is  about  on  a  par  with  a   complacent
author  reviewing  his  own  book.   It  was  —  in  his  own  con-
sidered  opinion  —  a  continuous  triumph,  a  military  marvel,
in  which  any  shortcomings  and  the  singular  lack  of  a  final
victory  were  all  due  to  other  factors—the  limitations  imposed
on  him  by  his  political  superiors  and  the  impatience  of   the
U.S.  public.   His  account  nevertheless  contains  an  inadvertent
revelation,  and  this  in  turn   shows  how   effectively   the   U.S.
military   can   close   the   shutters   on   an   "open   society"   and
keep   the   American   people   from   knowing   what   is  really
going  on.   The  revelation concerns  the  year  1965,  when  West-
moreland   took   over   and   made  Vietnam   an   American  war.
This  was  the   year   we   began   to   bomb  the   North   and   to
put  combat  troops  into  the  South.
If  We  Had  Only  Known  Then
It  has  always  been  assumed  that  we  committed  our  troops
again  to  an  Asian  ground  war  at  the  request  of  the   Saigon
government   to   save  it   from   defeat.    It   now   appears   from
Westmoreland's   narrative that  the  commitment  of  U.S.  combat
troops   was   a   unilateral   decision   by  our   military,  that   the
South  Vietnamese  were  not  only  reluctant  to  see  our  combat
troops   enter  the  country  but  when   they  did   arrive  tried   to
restrict   their   deployment  and   keep   them   as  far   as   possible
from  Saigon  and  other  populated  areas.   It  is  easy  to  imagine
the  uproar  in  Congress  and  the  country  if  this  had  not  been
kept   hidden   at  the   time.   If   it  had   been   known   that   the
Saigon   regime   itself   feared   "Americanization"   of   the   war,
this  would  have  strengthened   the  demand  that  we   negotiate
instead  of  escalate  —  that  we  do  then  what  we  are  finally
doing  .now  after  four  years  of  futile  bloodshed.    It  is  heart-
breaking  to  look  back  and  notice  that  on  February  1,   1965,
just  before  we  took  over  the  war,  only  258  Americans  had
been  killed  in  Vietnam.
It  is  strange  how,  with  all  the  correspondents   there   were
in  Vietnam,  Saigon's  misgivings  were  kept  from  public  knowl-
edge.   This,  the  best  kept  secret  of  the  Vietnamese  war,  can
now   be   pieced   together   from   three  passing   references   in
Westmoreland's    account.   The  first  is  at  pages  98-99  in  his
chapter   on   1965   as  "The   Year  of  Commitment".  There  he
says  that  by  the  late  spring  of   1965   he  was  convinced  that
the  Saigon  government  could  not  survive  for  more  than  six
months  unless  the  U.S.  put  in  "substantial   numbers"  of  com-
But  How  Do  You  Vote  If   You're  In  Jail?
Q.  Mr.  Secretary,  you  have  spoken  repeatedly,  both
here  and  on  other  occasions,  about  the  importance  of
self-determination   for   South   Vietnam  and   an   open
political   process  there.   I  wonder  how  you  would  re-
concile   this  with  the   recent  jailing  of   the  Buddhist
monk  and  the  continuing  presence  in  prison  of  Truong
Dinh  Dzu,  the  presidential  candidate.   Have  you  dis-
cussed  this  with  the  government  of   South  Vietnam?
What  is  your  position  on  it?
SEC.    ROGERS:  Yes,  we  have  discussed  it.   I  don't
think  the  two  questions  are  particularly related.   One
involves  civil  liberties  and  the  other  involves  voting
rights.   As  far  as  voting  rights  are  concerned,  these
two  cases  you  have  mentioned  wouldn't  affect  that...
—Secretary  Rogers'  press  conference,  April  7.
bat   troops.    He   nowhere   says  Saigon   asked  for   them;  only
that  he  became  convinced  of  their  need.   The   troops   began
to  arrive  in  July  and  the  first  combat  commitment put  the  1st
Cavalry   Division   (Airmobile)   into   the   Central   Highlands.
Saigon  "concurred"   in  the  decision  to  deploy  the  1st  Cavalry
in   the  Highlands.   "In   fact,"   Westmoreland    discloses,   "they
suggested   that  all  deploying  U.S.   combat  forces  be  concen-
trated  in  this  comparatively remote  area  in  order  to   minimize
the  impact  upon   the  South   Vietnamese   economy  and   popu-
lace."   (Our   italics.)   That   sounds   as   if   Saigon   were   less
fearful  of  defeat  than  of  American   "invasion".
Westmoreland   reveals  that  he  decided  to  override  Saigon's
objections.   He   says  he  felt  it  "essential"  that  U.S.   combat
units  "be  available  to  reinforce  and  stiffen   South  Vietnamese
forces  in  the  critical  areas  of  high  population   density."    He
adds,  "Consequently,  I  planned  to  build  up  U.S.  forces  in  an
arc  around  Saigon  and  in  the  populous  coastal  areas  and  not
to   restrict   U.S.   troops   to   the   Central   Highlands."     (Our
italics.)  To  ignore  Saigon's  wishes  was,  clearly,  to  treat  South
Vietnam  as  a  colonial   possession,   where  we  made  the  final
decisions,  just  as  the  French  had.   This,does  not  keep  West-
moreland,  eight   pages   later,  from  referring  blandly  to   "the
enemy's   absurd   claim   that   the   U.S.   was  no   more   than   a
colonial  power!"
When  one  checks  back  on  what  was  hapening  in  Saigon  at
the  time  one  begins  to  wonder  whether  Westmoreland   may
not  have  had  other  contingencies   in  mind  when  he  insisted
on   deploying   U.S.   troops   around   Saigon.    In   1965    peace
(Continued  on Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  21, 1969
(Continued   from  Page  One)
sentiment  surfaced  strongly  in   South   Vietnam.   In  February
the  Buddhists  launched  a  campaign   for   a  negotiated   settle-
ment,   demanding   the   withdrawal   of   both   U.S.   and   Com-
munist   forces.    In   March   the   Saigon   police   broke   up   an
attempt  by  the  smaller  but  powerful  Cao  Dai   sect  to  begin
a   similar   campaign.     In    May   Catholic   die-hards   accused
Saigon's  last  civilian government,   that  of  Phan  Huy  Quat,  of
secretly  conspiring  with  the  Buddhists  to  purge   the  military
and  negotiate  peace.   In  June  they  forced  the  civilian  regime
to  resign  and  brought   in  the  Thieu-Ky  military dictatorship.
The  military  made  its  debut  by  ordering   all  of  Saigon's   36
Vietnamese  language  papers  suspended  for  "purification",  no
doubt   of   peace   sentiment.    Was   Westmoreland    anxious  to
put   U.S.   troops  around   Saigon   so  they  would   be  ready   to
intervene   if   a  government   committed   to   negotiating    peace
had  come  to  power?
Even  Ky  Resisted
Even   after   the   military   take-over   in   Saigon,   the   South
Vietnamese  regime  still  wanted  to  confine  U.S.  combat   troops
to  areas   remote   from  population   centers.    This  is  indicated
on  page   114  in  Westmoreland's  chapter   on   1966   as    "The
Year   of  Development"*.  There  he  tells   how  he   positioned
U.S.  combat   troops  around  Saigon.   "This  again   affirmed   my
conviction,"   he  writes,  "that  the  combined   U.S.-South   Viet-
namese  military effort  must  begin  in  the  critical  areas  in  which
the   population    was   concentrated."    Apparently   the    South
Vietnamese  government  still  disagreed  with  him,  even   though
Ky   was  now   premier.    For   Westmoreland    adds,   "Secretary
McNamara,   on  a  visit  to  Saigon,  supported   me  in  my  oppo-
sition  to yet  another  South  Vietnamese  suggestion   (our  italics)
that  U.S.  forces  be  deployed  only  to  remote  areas  such  as  the
Central  Highlands."  In  this  carefully  sanitized  narrative,  we
are  not  told   why   Saigon  persisted   in  its  "suggestion".    One
reason  may  appear  at  page  132.   There,  in  discussing  1967  as
"The   Year  of  The  Offensive",  Westmoreland   says  that  while
half  of  our  combat  troops  continued  to  be  deployed   "in   close
proximity  to  the  heavily  populated  areas  of  the  country",   the
other  half  were  used  as  highly  mobile   "fire  brigade"   forces.
Westmoreland   says  "their  tremendous  firepower  made  it vastly
more  desirable  that   they  fight  in  remote,   unpopulated   areas
* i.e.  military development.
The  "Galvanization"  Seems  to  Have  Worn Off
"For  the  people  of   South  Vietnam,  the   enemy   Tet
offensive  was  a  Pearl  Harbor,  a  surprise attack  which
brought  the  shock  of  war  for  the  first  time  to  many
citizens   and   galvanized   them  into   military   and   po-
litical  action  .  .  .  The  unprecedented  response  of  the
Vietnamese  Armed  Forces  .  .  .  gave  heart  to  all  of  us."
—Westmoreland's  first  "posture   statement"  as  Army
Chief    of   Staff:     Senate   Armed   Services   March   25.
"South  Vietnamese  Army  and  regional  militia  units
carrying  out  patrols  and  ambushes  make  contact with
the   enemy  on  the  average  of   one  in  every  700  such
small-unit   actions.    The   scarcity   of   combat  during
these  patrols  suggests  that  an  'understanding' between
the   government   forces   on   the   local   level   and   the
guerrillas  is   in  effect   in  many  areas  of   South  Viet-
nam.    American  combat  units   make   contact   on   the
average  of   once  in  every  16  small-unit  actions   .  .  .
'I  wouldn't  go  so  far  as  to  say   there  is  an  arrange-
ment   here,   but   I  do  get   the   idea  that   Charles  and
my   counterpart  both   seem   to   know  what  the   other
is   doing   most   of   the   time,'   an   adviser  in   an   area
traditionally   a   stronghold   for   local   insurgents   said
recently."
—Bentley     Orrick    from     Saigon,   Baltimore    Sun,
April   5.
if  the  enemy  would  give  battle  there.    This   would  enable  the
full    U.S.   fire   potential   to   be  employed   without   the   danger
of   civilian  casualties."  (Our  italics).
This   is  what   Saigon   feared.    In   discussing   Psychological
Operations/Civic   Action,   Westmoreland    says  at  page   239,
"Even  though   reports  indicated  that  civilian  losses  ran   well
behind   those   experienced   in   World   Wars   I   and   II   and
Korea,  I  continued  to  emphasize  the  efforts  to  keep  losses  at  a
minimum."   But  the  World  Wars  were   total  wars,   and  the
Korean  war  after  the  first  few  months   was  waged   largely  in
North   Korea,   which   was   enemy   territory   and   where   we
levelled  just  about  everything.   South  Vietnam  was  not   sup-
posed   to  be  an   enemy   country.    Jonathan   Schell,   the   New
Yorker   correspondent,  spent  several  weeks  flying  over  Quang
Ngai  Province  in  South  Vietnam  in  the  spring  of  1967  in  the
two-seater  FAC  (Forward  Air  Control)   planes  which  helped
to  find  targets  for  air  strikes.  He  found  that  70%   of  the  vil-
lages  in  the  province  had  been  destroyed,  that  about  40%   of
An  Historic  Decision  Upholding  Selective  and  Secular   Objection   to  The  Vietnam  War
"The  sincerely  conscientious   man,  whose  principles  flow
from    reflection,   education,   practice,   sensitivity    to   con-
flicting  claims,  and  a  search  for  a  meaningful  life,  always
brings  impressive  credentials.   When  he  honestly   believes
that   he  will  act  wrongly  if   he  kills,  his  claim  obviously
has  great   magnitude.   That  magnitude  is  not  appreciably
lessened   if   his  belief   relates   not  to   war  in  general,   but
to   a  particular  war  or  to   a  particular  type  of  war.   In-
deed   a   selective    conscientious    objector   might   reflect   a
more  discriminating  study  of   the  problem,  a  more  sensi-
tive   conscience,  and  a  deeper  spiritual  understanding.  .  .
"When  a  nation  is  fighting  for  its  very  existence   there
are   public   and   private  interests   of   great   magnitude   in
conscripting   for   the   common   defense    all   available   re-
sources,   including  manpower  for  combat.   But  a  campaign
fought   with   limited   forces   for   limited   objects   with   no
likelihood  of  a  battlefield  within  this  country  and  without
a  declaration  of  war  is  not  a  claim  of  comparable  magni-
tude.  .  .  .  [This]  is  reflected  in  the  nation's   lack  of  calls
for  sacrifice  in  any  serious  way  by  civilians  .  .  .
"Some   suppose  that  the  only  reliable   conscience   is  one
responsive  to  a  formal  religious  community  .  .  .  But   in
Religion   in   the   Making  Alfred  North   Whitehead  taught
us  that  'religion  is  what  the  individual  does  with  his  own
solitariness.'  .  .  .  Often  it  is  harder  to  detect  a fraudulent
adherent  to  a  religious   creed  than  to  recognize  a   sincere
moral  protestant.    We  can  all  discern  Thoreau's   integrity
more   quickly   than   we   might   detect   some   churchman's
hypocrisy  ...
"When  the  state  .  .  .  seeks  to  override  reasonable  moral
commitments    it    makes    a    dangerously    uncharacteristic
choice.   The  law  grows  from  the  deposits  of  morality.  .  .  .
The  law  cannot  be  adequately enforced  by  the  courts  alone,
or  ...      by  the  police  and  the  military.   The  true   secret
of   legal   might   lies   in   the   habits   of   conscientious   men
disciplining   themselves   to   obey   the  law  .  .  .  When  the
law   treats   a  reasonable,   conscientious  act   as.  a  crime,  it
subverts   its   own  power.   It   invites   civilian   disobedience.
It   impairs   the   very   habits   which   nourish   and   preserve
the   law."
—Chief    Judge    Wyzanski,    U.S.   District   Court,  Boston,
in  U.S.  v.  John   Heffron    Sisso'n,  Jr.  April  1.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  21, 1S69
the  population  lived  in  "refugee  camps" and that another  40%
lived  underground beneath  their  destroyed  homes  in  areas  that
were   shelled   regularly   by  artillery   fire.    In   his   book,    "The
Military  Half",  Schell  reported  "the  overriding  fantastic   fact
that   we   are   destroying,   simply   by   inadvertence,   the   very
country  we  are  supposedly  protecting."
Another  White  Man's  Army
Saigon   also   feared   the   effect   of   U.S.   combat   troops—as
Westmoreland   writes—"upon   the   .  .  .  populace."    Foreign
troops   always   stir   resentment,   not   only   as   an   occupying
power  but  even  as  an  ally,  largely  because  in  an  immemorial
fashion   they  turn  so  many  of   the  women   into  whores.    But
there   was   a   special   reason   why   Saigon   had   to   fear    the
impact   on   its  people.    The   "Americanization"   of   the   war
meant   that   a  decade   after   the   French   had   left,   here   was
another,  white  man's  army,  taking   over   in  South   Vietnam.
For   so   nationalistic   a   people   as  the   Vietnamese,   this   was
bound   to  impair  the  "face"  of  the  Saigon   regime,   to  make
it  seem  a  puppet  again,  and  to  drive  more  of  the  youth  into
disaffection   or  the  rebellion.
Westmoreland   writes  (p.  71)   that  on  his  arrival  in  South
Vietnam  the  "strong  and  direct  connection   between  military
and  political  problems  was  quickly  impressed   upon  me."    In
an  appendix  on  "Psychological   Operations/Civic   Action"   (at
page  239)   he  speaks  of  Vietnam  as  "a  politically   sophisti-
cated  war."    But  there  is  very  little  evidence  that  he  under-
stands  the  politics  of  the  war.   Politics  at  bottom  are  people,
and  people  are  not  Westmoreland's  specialty.   There  is  no
sign  in  him  of  humor  or  humanity,  even  in  dealing  with  our
own  troops   much  less  the  enemy.   I  do  not   mean   to  imply
that   the   General   is  an   inhumane   man;   the   best   word   to
describe   him   is  "wooden"—I  first  heard   it   from    someone
who  knew  him   well   in  Vietnam.    For  him   as  for   Admiral
Sharp,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  air  and  naval  bombardment
of   the   North,    the   war   was   an   Operation    Bulldozer,   the
application  of  overwhelming  power  to  punish   and  to  terror-
ize   into   submission,   what   the   Germans   in   World   War   I
called  Schrecklichkeit.
The  two  main  political  problems   were  the  fierce  national-
ism  of  the  Vietnamese  and  the  land  hunger  of  the  peasantry.
You  will  find  no  light  on  either  in  the  350   double-columned
pages   of   the   Westmoreland-Sharp    report   on   the   war   and
the  bombing.    The  nationalistic  factor  is  what  General  Giap
had  in  mind  when  he  said  that  when  the  U.S.  had  a  million
The   Crack   In  Laird's  Crystal  Ball
Mr.  SPIVAK:  Professor  Brzezinski,  based  upon your
studies,   would   you   say   that   the   Soviet   Union   gen-
uinely   fears   the   United   States  and  arms   to   protect
herself  or  that  she  believes  she  may  one  day  be  able
to   conquer   the   United   States   by   a   sudden   nuclear
strike?
Mr.  BRZEZINSKI: Well,  I  don't  think  one   excludes
the  other  but  I  would  doubt  that  at  the  present  moment
the  Soviet  leadership  was  geared  to  making  prepara-
tions   for   some   hypothetical  x-day   in   the   future  on
which  it  would  launch a  pre-emptive  first  strike  against
the  United  States.   I  can  see  Soviet  military   planners
considering   this   among   other   alternatives    as   some-
thing  that  has  to  be  taken  into  account.   But  I  would
doubt  that  a  political  leadership  such  as  the  Soviets',
particularly  divided  political  leadership,   could  conclude,
today,   that   seven   years   from   now  it   will   launch   a
pre-emptive  first  strike  against  the  United  States  and
base  its  strategic   planning  on  that  basis.
—Prof.    Zbigniew   Brzezinski,   Director    of   the   Re-
search   Institute   on  Communist   Affairs     at    Columbia,
former   member  of  the  State  Department   Policy  Plan-
ning   Council,  on  Meet  The  Press  April  6.
men  in  Vietnam,  the  National   Liberation  Front  would   have
won  the  war.   We  would   have  been  well  on  the  way  to  that
million  now  if  Johnson  had  given  Westmoreland   the  200,000
more   men   he   wanted   instead   of   kicking   him   upstairs    to
Army   Chief   of   Staff.    The   land   question  was   summed    up
in  a  captured  Viet  Cong  document  first  published  in  Saigon
in   1966.*    "The    essence   of  the  national   problem,"  it  said,
"is  the  farmer's  problem.   The  basic  problem  of  the  farmers
is  land.   This  is  a  strategic  problem   we  can  never  neglect."
Land   Reform  is  the  No.   1  Unmentionable   in  the  West-
moreland   report.   His  appendix   on  Pacification  talks   of   the
"Revolutionary   Development"   teams   but  he   never   explains
what,  if  anything,  was  revolutionary  about  them.   We  are  told
they  help  the  peasants   improve   "hygiene,  sanitation,   educa-
tion  and  medical  facilities."   They  ask  for  land  and  we  give
them  latrines!   The  Army's  Area  Handbook   for  South  Viet-
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
*  Page   28  of  the   report  on  Land  Reform  in  Vietnam  by
the  Stanford  Research  Institute  for  AID.   It  appeared  orig-
inally  in  an  Aug.  1966  JUSPAO  report  on  "The  South  Viet-
namese   Communists  and  Rural   Vietnam".
Business  Week  Sees  "Sure  Disaster"  If  Wasteful  Pentagon   Spending  Continues
"In  recent   weeks,  the   nation  has   been   shocked   to  find
the  Pentagon  in  an  all-too-familiar  posture,  facing   charges
of   misjudgment  and  errors   in   weapons   development   and
procurement.    Defense    Secretary   Laird   has   described    to
Congress  a  few  of  the  worst  cases  that  he  has  found  since
moving   into   the   Pentagon,   including   the   Army's  AH-56
helicopter,   the   Air   Force's   C-5A   transport,   and   various
Navy   shipbuilding   programs,  which,  taken  together,  have
cost  taxpayers  almost   $2-bilIion  more  than  originally  an-
ticipated.    In  addition,  the  Air   Force's  F-lll   is   still   in
deep  trouble,  and  the   Army's  M-551  (Sheridan)   armored
reconnaissance   vehicle  looks  like  a  debacle.
"The   problem   of   enormous   defense   costs,   however,   is
not  simply  administrative  and  technical,  but  strategic  and
political.   Vietnam  spending   is   expected  by  the   Pentagon
to   stay   close   to   $30-billion   annually   for   the   next   two
years.   And  Secretary  Laird  himself   is  calling   for  deploy-
ment  of  an  amended  version  of  the   Sentinel   anti-ballistic
missile   system   (now  known  as  Safeguard)   that  will  cost
at  least  another  $6.6  billion  by  the  mid-1970's.
"There  is  no  reason  to  suggest  that   those   in  command
at   the   Pentagon   do   not   have   the   security   of   the    U.S.
in  mind.   However,  there   is  little  doubt  that   at  the   root
of   the  inability   of   government   to   check  the    development
of    many   unsound   weapons   systems   is    what   the    late
President   Dwight  D.   Eisenhower   called   'the   unwarranted
influence,   whether   sought   or   unsought,   of   the   military-
industrial   complex.'    Eight   years  ago,   Eisenhower's   warn-
ing  of  the  dangers  inherent  in  a  'disastrous  rise  of   power'
in  the  military  and  the   huge   defense   contractors    seemed
somewhat  alarmist.   Today  they  ring  of  prophecy.
"There   is   no   more   important    problem   for   President
Nixon  and  the  Congress  than  to  establish   adequate   super-
vision   and   control   of   Defense    Dept.   programs,   without
hampering   operations   of   the   agency.    The   Pentagon   as
well  as  powerful  companies  will  fight  any  attempt  to  curb
their  activities.    But  a  method  to  check  the   proliferation
of   unnecessary   and   unsound   military   programs   must   be
found.   The  alternative   is   sure  disaster."
—Editorial  in  Business  Week,  April  5.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  April  21,  1969
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
nam   (1967  ed.  p.  319)   says  2.5%   of  the  landowners  held
half   the  cultivated  land  "and   more  than  80%   of  the  land
was  cultivated by  peasants owning  no  land  at  all"  whom  the
landlords   could   dispossess   "without   cause".    The   peasant
helped  the  Viet  Cong  because  their  defeat  would  mean  the
return  of  the  landlords.  This  is the  key  to  the  war,  and  West-
moreland   talks   (at   p.   242)    of   the/'wealth    of   counter-
insurgency   experience"   we   have  amassed  in   the  war.    But
this,  the  basic  lesson,  he  has  never  learned.    Indeed   a  story
probably  lies  buried  behind  his  silence  on  this  issue.   Former
Secretary   of   Agriculture  Orville   Freeman   told   a   reporter
recently  (Richard  Critchfield  in  Washington  Star,  March  16)
that  in  1966  the  U.S.  Embassy  in  Saigon  "informed  Wash-
ington  it  opposed  land  reform  on  the  grounds  it  would  create
political  instability!''
When  Landlords  Are  Our  Allies
Is   that   how   Westmoreland    feels,   too?    And   does   that
explain  his  silence?   In  a  sense  of  course  land  reform  would
create   political   instability.   Our   base  is  in   a  regime  which
represents  the  absentee  landlords  and  the  gentry   class.   To
take  the  side  of  the  peasant  would  alienate  them.   But  the
alternative   is  to   keep   U.S.   troops   in   Vietnam   for   a   long
time,   bolstering  an   oligarchic   regime   against   the   majority
of  its  people.   Ever  since  the  Russian  revolution,  the   failure
of  intervention  and  counter-revolution  has  been   due  to  this
same  unwillingness  to  let  the  peasant  have  the  land.
It   is  dangerous,   especially   when   the   Pentagon  has   been
tooling  up  for  "counter  insurgency",  i.e.  interventionist!!  else-
where,   to  have  an   Army  Chief   of   Staff   who  has  failed   to
grasp  this  elementary  fact.   Westmoreland  doesn't  even  under-
stand  the  military  realities  involved  in  the  war  he  commanded
for   four   frustrating  years.    He   keeps   saying   complacently
that  the  Viet  Cong   cannot   hope   to  win  a  military  victory.
That  is true,  but  irrelevant.  It  doesn't  need  to  win  a military
victory.   All  the  VC  needs  is  to  keep  fighting  until  we  see
that   the  game   isn't   worth   the   cost,   which   is  why  we  are
negotiating  now  in  Paris.   In  this  battle  between  an  elephant
and  a  swarm  of  fleas,  the  very  immensity of  our  military  ma-
chine  is  its  chief  weakness.   This  is  how  a  fourth  rate  war
9,000  miles   away   against   a  poorly   armed   and   vastly   out-
numbered   enemy  has  weakened   the  dollar,  created  inflation
and  exacerbated  all  our  domestic  problems.
Westmoreland   no   more   understands   the   politics   of   the
war  at  home  than  he  did  the  politics  of  the  war  in  Vietnam.
Alert  and  Eager  For  New  Vietnams
"Our   operations  in  Vietnam  have  been  conducted  to
block   Communist   aggression   in   Southeast   Asia,   but
this   aggression   is   only   the   most  visible  portion  of
the   Communist  threat  to   United  States   security  in-
terests  in  the  Pacific.   Less  obvious  components of  the
total   Communist   threat   are   manifested  by   the  pro-
vocative  actions  of  North  Korea,  the  mounting  pres-
sures  of  the  North  Vietnamese  presence  in  Laos  and
Cambodia,  and  the  rising  level  of  Communist inspired
insurgency  in  Thailand  and  Burma.   These   situations
have   required   careful   and   continuing  evaluation   to
insure   the   most   efficient   allocations  of   available  re-
sources  in  the   Pacific   Command  to  conduct  the   war
in  Vietnam  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  protection  of
vital   United   States   interests   in   an   area   stretching
from   the   Bering   Sea   in   the   north   to   the   eastern
Indian  Ocean  in  the  South."
—4''TO.  Sharp's   preface    to  his  Report   on  the   War.
In  his  first  posture  statement  as  Army  Chief  of   Staff   to  the
Senate  Armed  Services  Committee  March  25  he  said  "There
are   disturbing   indications   that   deliberate   efforts   are   being
made  to  introduce  the  divisiveness  found  in  our  society  into
the   Army."   "Divisiveness"    is   what   a   free   society   is   all
about.    If   we  are  divided   about   Vietnam   it   is  because  the
country   is  waking   up   to  the   lack  of   candor   and   the   lade
of   competence   in  the   way  he   and   the   military  have   been
running   the  war.    The  draftees   reflect  this   same  disillusion
and  dismay,  and  the  same  fear  that  our  military  are  endanger-
ing  the  American  economy  and  the  stability  of  our   society.
Even   in   his   final   report   on   the   war   Westmoreland   is
still  relying  on  the  body  count  as his  primary index  of  military
progress.   He  wages  war  by  computer.   "Since  Jan.  1,  1961,"
he  reported  to  the  Senate  Armed   Services   Committee,    "the
NVA  and  VC  have  lost  almost  four  times  as many men  killed
in   battle   as  have   the   South   Vietnamese   and   Free  World
forces."   This  ratio,  he  added,  "includes  the  figures  for    1968,
when  the  enemy  lost  5.67  men  killed  for  each  allied   soldier
killed."    The   precision   verges   on   caricature.    Body   count
statistics  have  long  been  a  bitter  joke  among  the  troops  but
Westmoreland  takes  them  as  seriously  as  a  baseball   box-score.
Asia  is  no  place  for  body-count  warfare.    Even  with  a  4-to-l
ratio   in   our   favor,   we  could   easily   run   out   of   American
bodies   long   before   we  had   made   a   dent   in   the   teeming
millions  of  Asia.
We'll  Be Clod to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
Index  For  1968   Now  Ready—Send   Long  Stamped   Addressed  Envelope  for   Free  Copy
FOR   STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book, In
A Time of  Torment  (Random House)  regular  price $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate  if
Please   renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.
4420  29th   St.
.  zip
gift  announcement
enter)   a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  D
the   enclosed   $5:
State
F.  Stone's  Weekly               vai/ss
N.W.,    Washington,  D. C.  20008
IE    Stone's  Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
(Note  Corrected   Address)
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington, D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.    Second   Class   Postage   Paid   at   Washington,   D. C.    Published   every   other   Monday   at   4420   29th   St..    N.  W.,   Washington    D  C
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  S5  in  the  U.S.;    $6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  S17 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED