I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969nov17.pdf

============================================================

Nixon's  Nov.  3  Speech  A  Blueprint  for  Protracted   War,   Pps.  1-4
A  New  "Stab  In  The  Back"  Myth  To  Excuse  Military-Political  Incompetence
Let  iis  be  united  for  peace.  Let  us  also  be  united  against      defeat  or  humiliate  the   United  States.  Only  other  Ameri-
defeat.   Because  let  us  understand:  North  Vietnam  cannot      cans  can  do  that.     —Nixon's  address   on  Vietnam,  Nov.   S.
L F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi- Weekly                    *^
VOL.  XVII,  NO.  21
NOVEMBER  17,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
The  Old  Nixon  Surfaces  Again
No  Communist  regime  ever  rewrote  history  more  blatantly
than  Richard  Nixon   in  his  Nov.   3  speech   on  Vietnam.  He
asked,  "why  and  how  did  the  U.S.  become  involved  in  Viet-
nam   in  the  first  place?"   His  answer  was  that   15  years  ago
North  Vietnam,  with  the  support   of  Communist  China  and
the   Soviet  Union,  "launched   a  campaign  to  impose  a  Com-
munist   government   on   South   Vietnam,  by   instigating   and
supporting  a  revolution." It  was  then,  he  went  on,  that  Eisen-
hower  "sent  economic aid  and  military  equipment."  The  truth
is  that   15  years   ago  Nixon   was  doing  his   best   to  prevent
peace   from   breaking  out   in  Vietnam  and   he   failed   because
Eisenhower  would  not  support  him.
This  has  been  Nixon's  war  for  a  long,  long time.
Nixon's  Secret   War  Speech
In  1954,  as  the  opening  of  the  Geneva  Conference in  Indo-
china  drew  near, Nixon  tried  to drum  up  support  for American
armed   intervention.   But,   characteristically,   he   also  tried   to
keep  the  public from  knowing what  he  was  up  to.  The  news-
papers   of  April   17,   1954,   carried  blaring  headlines  over  a
story  that  "a  high  Administration  spokesman"   in  an   off-the-
record  question  and   answer  session  the  day  before  with  the
Society  of  Newspaper  Editors  in  Washington,  had  said  "if   to
avoid  further   Communist  expansion   in  Asia  and   Indochina,
we  must  take  the  risk  now  by putting  our  boys  in,  I  think  the
Executive  has  to  take  the  politically  unpopular   decision  and
do  it."  The  news  leaked  within  24  hours  from  Paris  that  the
speaker   was  Vice  President   Nixon.
In  the  second  volume  of  his  memoirs,  Mandate  for   Change,
Eisenhower  recalled  that  at  a  press  conference  after  the  Nixon
speech  had  leaked  out,  Eisenhower   said,  "there  was  no  plaus-
ible  reason  for  the  United  States  to  intervene"  and  added—•
and  this  must  have  seemed   to  Nixon   the  most  cutting  com-
ment  of  all—"we  could  not  even  be  sure  that  the  Vietnamese
population   wanted  us  to  do  so."   Nixon   said  freedom  was  at
stake  in   Indochina.   "It   was  almost   impossible,"   was  Eisen-
hower's   reaction,   "to  make   the  average   Vietnamese   peasant
realize  that  the  French,  under  whose  rule  his  people  had  lived
for  some  80  years,  were really fighting  in  the  cause  of  freedom,
while  the  Vietminh   [as  the  Communist-led   rebels  were  then
known],  people  of   their   own   ethnic   origins,   were   fighting
on  the  side  of  slavery."   Then  Eisenhower  added  that  famous
remark,   "It  was  generally  conceded  that  had  an  election   been
held,  Ho  Chi  Minh  would  have  been  elected  President."
The   origins  of  the  war  lay  in  the  efforts   made  by  Nixon
The  Bitter  Medicine  The  U.S.  Must  Swallow
Deliberate,  orderly  but  complete  withdrawal  has  be-
come  in  my judgment  the  only  practical  course  open  to
the  United States if  we are  to  restore our  foreign  policy
to  coherence,  regain  our  psychological  balance,  allevi-
ate  the  deep-seated   strife   in  our  society,  and  reorder
our  national  priorities  in  ways  that  will  win  the  sup-
port  of  a  large   majority  of  our  own  people   ...      In
particular  there  can  be  no  real  truce  between  the  gen-
erations  .  .  .  until  Vietnam  is  terminated  ...    If we
can   forthrightly   acknowledge   the   basic,    unpalatable
truth—that  our  intervention  in  1965  was  misconceived,
that  viewed  through   cold,  clear   eyes   it   could  not  be
justified   on   the   grounds   that   vital   national   interest
was  at  stake—then   we  can  bite  the  bullet  in  Vietnam.
We  can  acknowledge  past  failure  and  the inevitability
of  some  degree  of  defeat  ...    as  a  means  of  liquidating
an  enterprise  that  is  beyond  retrieval  and  a  condition
that  is  poisoning  the  bloodstream   of  our  society.
—pps.   236-8,  The  Limits   of  Intervention   by   Town-
send  Hoopes,  Under  Secretary  of  the  Air   Force   (1967-
6Q)  an  insider's   account  of  the  revolt  in  the  Establish-
ment   which   forced   LBJ    to  stop   bombing   the   North.
and  others  like  him  to  prevent  any  such  election  from  being
held.  Fifteen   years  ago  all  the  great  Powers  including   Com-
munist  China and  the  Soviet  Union  but  not  the  United  States,
agreed  to  guarantee  an  armistice  based  on  temporary division
of  the  country  with  elections  on  reunification  to  be  held   two
years   later.  Under   pressure   from   hawks   like   Nixon,    John
Foster   Dulles   and   Admiral  Radford,   Eisenhower   laid   the
seeds  of  future  trouble  by  setting  up  the  Diem  regime  in  the
South  and  encouraging   it  to  refuse  elections  two  years  later.
But  Ike  did  resist  American  intervention.  At  a  White  House
conference   on   whether   to   intervene   rather   than   accept   the
Geneva   settlement,    Eisenhower   observed   "that   if   the   U.S.
were  unilaterally,  to  permit  its  forces   to  be  drawn  into  con-
flict  in  Indochina  and  in  a  succession   of  Asian  wars,  the  end
result  would  be  to  drain  off  our  resources  and  to  weaken  our
overall  defense  situation."  That  is exactly what  the  Vietnamese
war  has  done,   and  what   its  continuation   under   Nixon   will
continue  to  do.
II
Those  who  say there  was nothing  new  in  the  Nixon  speech
are  badly  mistaken.  Never  before  has  he  disclosed   how  com-
mitted  he  is  emotionally   and  ideologically  to  this  war.  It  may
be  ludicrous  but   it  is  revealing  that  he  wrapped   himself   in
(Continued  on Page   Two)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stove's  Weekly,   Nov.  17,  1,96!)
(Continued  from   Piige   One)
the  mantle of  Woodrow  Wilson,  and  said  that  Vietnam  if  not
another  "war  to  end  wars",  ti'M  a  war  to bring closer  Wilson's
"goal  of  a  just  and  lasting  peace."   But  Wilson   thought  this
goal  could  only  he  achieved through  a  League  of  Nations,  in
a  disarmed  world,  not  in  a  Pax  Americana.  It  was  sheer  self-
satire  for  Nixon   to  present   himself  as  Wilson,   thus  casting
tiny  Vietnam  in  the   role  of  imperial  Germany  seeking—and
almost  achieving—world  dominion.  Those  final  tremolo  pas-
sages  of  his  speech  sounded  like  a  />/// on  drafted  by  Russell
Baker.  There  was  also  the  exaggeration  on  which  humor  feeds
in  his  new  version  of  the  domino  theory.  If  we  went  down  to
defeat  in  Vietnam,  the  dominoes   would   fall   "in   the   Middle
East,  in  Berlin,  eventually even  in  the  Western    Hemisphere."
Only   a  few   days  earlier  in  an  anemic  Latin  American   mes-
sage,   Nixon   said   the   U.S.   was   no   longer   concerned   with
free  institutions  south  of  the  border.  Now  we  were  told  that
in  fighting for  "freedom"  in  Vietnam  we  were  also  safeguard-
ing  it  in  Latin  America!
A  Threat   To  Re-Escalate
If   the  war  is  so  crucial  to  the  whole  planet,   how  can  we
ever   withdraw  without  victory?  Nixon   made   plain   that   he
did  not  intend  to  do  so.  He  indicated  that  our  troops  would
stay  as  long  as  necessary  to  keep  the  Thieu-Ky   regime  firmly
in  power.   The   enemy  was  put   on  notice  that  it  must   "fade
away"  and  accept  a  political-military defeat  or  face  re-escala-
tion  of  the  American  effort,  perhaps  also  a  resumption   of  the
bombing.  This  is  why  there  is  no  time-table  for  withdrawal.
Now  as  in  1954  Nixon  claims  only  to  be  defending   South
Vietnam's  right  to  self-determination.   Two   days  before   he
spoke  an   event   took   place   which   showed   how   hollow   this
claim  was  and  is.   At  the  South  Vietnamese   embassy  here  in
Washington,   as  in   Saigon   and   among   the   exiles   in   Paris,
South   Vietnamese    everywhere   celebrated    Nov.    1   as   their
"National   Day."     Few   Americans   are   aware   that   National
Day  commemorates  the  overthrow  of  Ngo  Dinh  Diem.   His
nine  years  of  repression  and  corruption  sparked  the   rebellion,
and   his   overthrow   was  so  popular   that   the   date   has   been,
marked   ever   since   as  a  day  of   deliverance.    Diem   was   our
first  experiment   in  the   "Vietnamization"  Nixon   offers   as  if
it  were  a  new  panacea.   The  more  military  and  economic  aid
we  poured   into  Vietnam,  the  fiercer  the   rebellion   grew.   In
1965   Johnson  finally  had   to   "un-Vietnamize"   the  war  and
On  The  Blood  Bath  Myth
Hotly   Kony—ln  contrast  to  the  apocalyptic  view  of
the  future  currently  being  voiced  in  some  quarters  in
the  United  States,  specialists  in  this  part  of  the  world
strongly  doubt  that  an  American withdrawal  will  give
the  Communists  an  automatic victory in  South Vietnam.
Even  if  the  Communists  do  acquire  a  share  of  power
in  Saigon,  these  specialists  submit,  it  is  equally  doubt-
ful   that  they  could  or  would  slaughter  everyone   who
resists  their authority.
This  is  not  to  depict  the  Communists  as  Boy  Scouts
dedicated  to  good   deeds.   Nor  does   it   mean  that  their
ultimate  goal   is  anything  less  than  the  complete  con-
trol  of  Vietnam. Yet  they,  like  their  opponents,  cannot
realistically  ignore   the  fact  that  Vietnam  is  a  highly
fragmented,   pluralistic  society   that  can  only  be  gov-
erned  by  balancing   rather  than  crushing  its  vast  and
often   baffling  assortment  of  factions.  .  .  .
Indeed,  the  Vietcong   itself   is  not  a  monolith  but,  as
its  formal  title  proclaims,  a  "front"  comprising repre-
sentatives  of  Vietnam's   diverse  factions—stiffened  and
directed,   of   course,   by   the   Communists.  Accordingly,
the    American    expert    Douglas    Pike   suggests    that
postwar  Vietnam  could  conceivably  resemble  a  federa-
tion   like   Switzerland   with   the   country's   variegated
groups   maintaining  their   regional   strongholds   while
participating   in  a  central   coalition   government.
—Stanley   Karnow,   Washington   Post,   Nov.    3.   A
similar   view   was   expressed    by   former     ambassador
Averell  Harriman  on  ABC   television  the  same  night.
take  over  combat   directly  lest  the  Saigon  regime  collapse  and
a  peace  Cabinet  take   over.   There  is  little  reason   to   believe
that  Vietnamization  will  be  any  more   successful  with  Thieu
and  Ky.  Their  regime  is  as  unrepresentative  as  Diem's.  What
could   be  more  impudent   (to  borrow   an  Agnewism)   than  to
support   dictators  in  the  name  of  self-determination?
The  real  temper  of  the  South  Vietnamese  may  be   gathered
from   what  happened   on  National   Day  in   Saigon   and  Paris.
In  Saigon,  Thieu  marked   the  occasion  with  an  amnesty.   But
he  was  afraid   to   free   Truong  Dinh   Dzu,   who  polled   the
second   highest  vote  in   the   Presidential   election   as  a   peace
candidate.   Senator  Tran  Van  Don,  the  man  who  led  the  coup
which  overthrew  Diem,  addressed   a  meeting   in  Saigon,   pro-
posing   a  neutralist  policy  and  an  end  to  "fracticidal   strife."
The   AP   reported   that   "almost    every   influential  group   in
South   Vietnam   was   represented   at   the   meeting."     General
"Big"    Minh,   whose   popularity   Thieu   feared   so   much   he
Secret  U.S.  Combat Evaluation  Finds  South  Vietnamese  Army  Declining
Saigon — The    latest     official     American    evaluation    of
South  Vietnamese  fighting   ability  rates  the  combat  effec-
tiveness   of   government   troops   in   the   second   quarter  of
1969  as  slightly  lower  than  it  was  in  the  same  period a  year
ago.   The  evaluation  also   says  that  the  South  Vietnamese
7th   Division  became   persistently   less  effective  in   combat
during  each  of  the  three  quarters  preceding  the  time  when
it  was  assigned  to  replace  troops  of  the  9th  American  Divi-
sion   as  they   left   Kien  Hoa  and  Dinh  Tuong  provinces  in
the  Mekong  Delta.
This  unpublished  but  official  American  view  that  the  Viet-
namese   actually  lost   combat  effectiveness  since   last   year
forms  a  contrast  to  the  glowingly  optimistic  public  state-
ments   and   "background"  evaluations  offered  to   reporters
by  high  American  advisers  to  many  Vietnamese  units.  .  .  .
The  evaluations  are  prepared  by  American  officials  periodi-
cally,   based   both   on   personal   assessments   by  American
advisers who  work  in  the  field with South  Vietnamese  troops
and  on  elaborate  sets  of  statistical  criteria.  They  are  given
"confidential"  classifications  which  are  not  normally  avail-
able to the press....
One  of  the  recurring  themes  is  the  official  American  view
that  Vietnamese  troops  "lack  aggressiveness"  when  actual-
ly  facing  the  enemy  in  combat.  This  theme,  which  is  applied
to   most   major  units,   is   carried  further  in   references   to
one  unit  which  was  deeply  involved  in  the  battles   of  Dak
To   and   Ben   Het   during   the   period   covered.   That    unit
dropped  from  the   second-highest    combat   rating   in   South
Vietnam   to  the   third   from  the   bottom  during  the   period
on  which  the  official  estimate  is  based.  During  a  relatively
quiet  period  the  unit  had  worked  its  desertion  rate  down  to
a  relatively  low  level  by  South  Vietnamese  Army standards,
hut  during  the  period  included  in  the  evaluation,  the  unit's
desertion   rate   soared   to   more   than   three   times   what   it
had  been.
—John  E.   Woodruff     in  the  Baltimore  Sun,   Oct.  29.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7. F.  Stone's  Weekly,  Nov.  17, 1969
barred   him   from   the   Presidential  election,   seconded   Tran
Van   Don   and   called   for   "a   people's   Congress"    (London
Times,  Nov.   3)   to   replace   the   present   regime.    In   Paris  a
group  of  exiles  representing  many  different  currents  of  South
Vietnamese   politics   signed   a   National   Day   manifesto    (Le
Monde,   Nov.    1)   calling  for   peace,   independence   and   neu-
trality.  "It   is  only  by  a  broad  union  of  forces,"   their  appeal
said,  "that  we  can  clearly  show  the  government  of  the  United
States   that   for   Vietnamese   patriots   the   card   of   anti-Com-
munism   long   ago   lost   its   significance  in   the   face   of    the
suffering   without   limit  of   the   South   Vietnamese   population
under  American  bombardment."    That  is  the  silent  majority
for   peace  Thieu  is  suppressing   with   the  arms  we  give   him
in   the   name   of   "Vietnamization."    What   if   the   opposition
tries   to   overthrow   him   as  it  did  Diem?   Do   we   step   in?
How  far  does  Nixon's  blank  check  to  Thieu  extend?
Ill
Nixon's  effort   to  get   the   U.S.   to  intervene  15  years  ago
shows   him   as  little  concerned   with   "self-determination"   at
home  as  in  Saigon.    Eisenhower   had  just  been  elected   on  an
implied  promise  to  end  the  war  in  Korea.  The  country  wanted
no  more  land  wars  in  Asia.   Korea  had  been  our  first  defeat;
ill-armed  Chinese  "volunteers"  had  pushed   us  back  from  the
Yalu   all   the   way  to   the   38th   Parallel   despite   our   air  su-
premacy.  The  acceptance  of  that  defeat  in  the  Korean  armistice
was nevertheless  immensely  popular.   Yet  within  a  few  months
Nixon  asked   Eisenhower   to  lead  the  U.S.  into  another   Korea
in  Vietnam.
Silent   Maybe  But   A  Majority?
Nixon  claims  to  talk  for  a  silent  majority  now.*  He  knew
he   spoke   for   no   majority   then.    To   take   the   country   into
another   Asian   war   so  soon   after   peace   had   been   made   in
Korea  would  have  precipitated   a  crisis  of  confidence  easily  as
great   as   the   current   one.    Repression    against   opponents    of
the  war might  very  likely   have  been  necessary.  Nixon  had  the
requisite   mentality   for   it.    His   "twenty    years   of   treason"
campaign    against   the   Democrats   in   1953   was  dirtier   than
Joe  McCarthy.    With  Mundt,   over   the  almost   universal   ob-
jections  of  the  American  bar,  Nixon  had  fathered  the  Mundt-
Nixon  Internal  Security  Act  a  few  years  earlier.   For  the  first
time  in  the  history  of   a  free  society,  it  set  up   a   Subversive
From   A  Combat  Soldier  In  Vietnam
Dear  Sir—Perhaps    I  can  help  clear  up  the  mystery
of    the   "end   of    search-and-destroy  missions"   (mt'ii-
tioneel  in  the  Oct.  20  Weekly, p.  2).  The  Cavalry's pri-
mary  mission is  search-and-destroy; this  is  no less  true
today  than  it  was  in  July.  However, about  a  month  and
a  half  ago  we  were  visited  in  the  field  by  some  news-
men.  Before  their  helicopter  arrived  we  were  instructed
that   if   we  should  be  asked   what   we   were   doing   we
should  say,   "We  are   on   a  reconnaissance-in-force for
pacification   purposes."   Under  no   circumstances  were
we  to  call  our  mission  "search   and  destroy."  It   seems
that   the   army   ended   search-and-destroy    missions   by
changing  their  name,  just   as   for   a  while  they  were
called  "search  and  clear."
In   our   area   of   operations   there   was   a   lull   for   a
while  after  the  battle  of  Tay  N'inh,  presumably  in order
for  the  NVA  to  be  supplied.  The  officers  say  that there
are   indications   (e.g.,  captured  documents,  POWs,  de-
fectors)  that  the  enemy  really  thought  that  they could
take  Tay   Ninh   and  that   their   morale  was  extremely
low.  That  only  accounts for  a  small part  of  the  country,
however.   Anyway,  now   the   level   of   the   fighting   is
about  as  high  as  it  normally  is  at  this  time  of  year.  I
can  assure  you  that  search-and-destroy  is  what  we  do
every  day, though we  don't  call  it  that.
—Letter  from   A  Soldier  In  Vietnam,  Oct.  25.
Activities  Control   Board   as  an   instrument—Truman  said   in
his   unsuccessful  veto   message—of   "thought   control."    It   is
not   difficult   to  envisage  the  kind  of  campaign  Nixon   would
have  waged  against  opponents   of  a  Vietnamese   war  then   or
the  kind  he  may  be  preparing  to  wage   now.
Agnew,  as  McCarthy  said  on  "Issues  and  Answers"  Nov.   2
(Continued  on  P'igc'   Four)
'•'  The  majority  may   be  silent  but  is  it   for  continuation  of
the  war  until  the  other  side  accepts  the  Thieu-Ky  regime?
The   Louis  Harris  poll   in  Time  magazine   Oct.  31  indicates
this  is   doubtful.   In  a  dual  poll   of   "public"   and   "leaders"
Harris  found  only  38'/,   of  the  former  and  3l'/i   of  the  latter
favored  slowing  up withdrawals  to  save  the  Thieu-Ky regime,
while  64%  of  the  former  and  749;  of  the  latter  favored  re-
placement  of  the  Thieu  regime  with  one  more  representative
of   the   South   Vietnamese   people.    The   broadest    consensus
(80  and  81 '/<   respectively)   felt,  unlike  Nixon,  that  it  was   a
mistake  to  get  into  the  Vietnam  war  altogether.
Muskie's  Reply  to  Agnew's  Charge  of   Playing   Russian   Roulette   on  MIRV
BILL  MONROE: You  suggested  that  we  ought  to  have
a  six-month  ban  on  the  testing  of  the  MIRV  weapons,   the
multiple  warhead  missiles   that   can   put  out   several   war-
heads,  each  of  which  can  be  guided  to  their  own  targets.
Now   that  the  SALT  talks,  the  Strategic   Arms  Limitation
Talks,  have  been  announced  to  begin  in  about  three  weeks,
do  you  still  feel  it  would  be  a  good  idea  if  we  would  stop
our  own  testing  of  the  MIRV  weapons?
SEN.  MUSKIE: Yes,  I  do  for  these  reasons.  We're  told
that  our  own  testing  of  the  MIRV—let's call  it  a  multiple
warhead,  a  single  missile  that  can  discharge  and  target  up
to   13  nuclear  warheads—will be  completed  by  next  May.
Once  we've  completed  our  testing,   the  Russians obviously
will  feel  they  must  complete  theirs  until  they've  developed
the   MIRV.  Once  this  weapon  is  in  both  arsenals,   we  will
have  escalated  the  nuclear  arms  race  to  a  new  and  more
costly  and  more perilous plateau. We  now  have  the capacity
to  destroy  each  other  to  the  point  where  neither  is  likely
to  attack   the  other  first.  That  kind  of  a  stalemate  can  be
maintained  at  the  present   level  of  armaments  or  at   some
higher   one.   It   doesn't    make  sense   to   move   to   a  higher
plateau  if  we  can  avoid  it.
Once  we  have  completed  our  testing,  then  the possibility
of  reaching  agreement  on  the  use  of  this  weapon  is  almost
zero  ...      I  think  that   unilateral   suspension  of  testing  of
multiple  warheads  by  us  now  could  be  a  useful  initiative.
BILL  MONROE:  Commenting   on  this  proposal   by  you,
Vice  President  Agnew  said  no  responsible  person  would  play
Russian  roulette  with  American  security.
SEN.  MUSKIE: The  development  of  ever  more complex
and  costly  nuclear  weapons  is  itself  a  form  of  Russian rou-
lette.  What  I'm  trying  to  do  is  to  stop  that  roulette  wheel
from  turning.  Let  me  point  out  that  in  1963  we  were  able
to  achieve  a  nuclear  test  ban  treaty  with  the  Soviet  Union
because   (and  Mr.  Khrushchev told  Mr.  Harriman  this)  in
June  of  that  year  President  Kennedy  in  a  speech  at  Ameri-
can  University  announced  unilateral  suspension  of  tests  in
the  atmosphere.  By  the  end  of  that  July  we  had  an  agree-
ment  with  the  Russians.
—On  the  Today  Show  NBC,   Oct.  29.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Nov. 17, 1969
Agnew  Talks  of  Peaceniks   As  Moscow   Does  of  Dissident  Writers
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
is  "Nixon's  Nixon."    Agnew   takes  the  low  road,  as  Nixon
did  under  Eisenhower.   If  the  Agnew  speech   at Harrisburg,
Pa.,  Oct. 30  is  read  with  Nixon's  Nov. 3  speech,  we  can  see
a  new  campaign  shaping  up  against  the  peace  forces.   Agnew
spoke   of  "separating"  the  protest  leaders  "from   our  society
—with   no  more  regret  than  we  should  feel  over  discarding
rotten   apples  from  a  barrel."    That   "rotten   apple"   remark
is  vintage  authoritarianism.  This   is  how   Moscow   hardliners
talk  of   dissident  writers.   And   how  would   Agnew   separate
them  from  the  rest  of  us?   By  prison  or  concentration camp?
Nixon's   Wicked   Nonsense
Nixon   chimed   in  with  a  similar  theme  when  he   said   we
had   to   unite   for   peace   and   unite   against   defeat  because
"North  Vietnam  cannot  defeat  or  humiliate  the  United  States.
Only  Americans  can  do  that."   This   is  first  of  all  nonsense.
North  Vietnam  did  hand  the  U.S. a  defeat  and  a  humiliation
in  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world  by  standing  up  to  the  most
ferocious  bombardment  in  history.   It  increased  its  infiltration
and   aid   to   the   Southern   rebels   despite   that  bombardment
and  finally  forced   the  U.S. to  end   it  in  order  to  bring  the
North  and  the  NLF  to  the  negotiating table.  If  any  Americans
did  that,  it  was  not  the  peaceniks  but  our  military-intelligence
bureaucracy  which made  one  resounding mistake after  another,
and  led  us into  a quagmire.
Nixon  is  picking  up  where  the  French  military-intelligence
bureaucracy  broke off.  They  said  the  war  was  lost  in  Paris, not
in  Indochina,  because  the  French  grew   sick  of  the  war, and
decided  to negotiate  instead.  They  grew  sick  of  the  war  because
they   grew   suspicious   (as    Americans   have)    of    optimistic
forecasts   and   repeated   promises  of   victory.    They   began   to
realize  that  military  force  could  not  win  a  political  war, and
that   the   sooner   defeat   was   accepted   the   better   for   France.
Nixon  hints  as  the  French  rightists did  that  if  America  loses
it  will  be  because  of   traitors  at  home.    Those   who   oppose
•the  war   are  thus   cast  as  the   real  enemy.    Thus   dissent  can
be persecuted  as treason.
There  could  be  no  blinder  folly  than  such  a  course. "If,"
A  Fast  Man  With  A  Non-Sequitur
Q.  Mr.  Vice  President,  let  us  take  the   bull  by   the
horns.  Isn't   seizing  upon   this  letter  [the letter   from
North    Vietnam   to   the   Moratorium]   a   last-minute
attempt   to  dampen  down  the   moratorium  by  the  ad-
ministration?
A.  Absolutely  not. We  didn't   send   the   letter.  The
letter  was  sent  by  a  foreign  power  seeking   to  divide
the  people  of  the   United   States.   I  would   feel   remiss
in  my duty  as  Vice  President,  and  I  am  sure  the  Presi-
dent   would   feel   remiss   in  his, if  he  didn't   make   the
contents  of  this  letter  known  with  our  reaction  to  it.
Q.  Mr.  Agnew,  how  does  this  differ   from   the   usual
propaganda   efforts   that   are   not   unknown,  such   as
this  country's   offering   to  rebuild   North   Vietnam,   et
cetera?
A.  This  Government  has  never  addressed  a communi-
cation  to  the   citizens  of   an_ enemy   power  suggesting
that  they  rebel  against  their  own government.
Q,  Have  we  not  dropped  leaflets  from  airplanes dur-
ing  time  of  war?
A.  This  is  not  a  leaflet  dropped from  an  airplane.
—From  text  of  Ayneiv's   />ress  conference   of  Oct. 14
at  p.  H21,  Weekly   Compilation   of  Presidential  Docu-
ments, Vol.  5, No.  43, Oct.  20.
Agnew  said   at  Harrisburg,  Pa., "in   challenging  peace dem-
onstrators  we  polarize  the   American  people,   I  say  it  is  time
for  a  positive  polarization."  This  is  also  the  language  of   the
most  extreme   factions  in   the  anti-war  movement.    Like  the
abolitionists   before  the   Civil  War, they  would   rather   tear
the  country  apart  than  permit  a  moral  wrong   to  go  on.    A
wise  leadership would  avoid  the  adoption  of  the  same  strategy
in  reverse.  Are  Nixon  and  Agnew  so  obtuse  that  they  do  not
see  that   opposition   to   the   war   has   penetrated   every   class
and   every   region  in  our   country?    Do   they  think  they  can
get  away  with  identifying  dissent  on  the  war  with  revolution
and  treason?  Are  they  looking  for  a  confrontation  at  home?
Is  this  why,  as  this   is  written,  news  comes  that   the   Justice
Department   has  suddenly  switched  overnight   and   denied   a
parade  permit  to  the  Mobilization?   Is  Nixon  about  to  do  a
Daley?                                                                     Nov. 5
We'll  Be Clod  to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
This  Issue  Went  to  Press  Nov. 6  for  Mailing  Nov. 8  in  time   (we  hope)  for  the   Mobilization.
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  P.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time  of Torment  (Random House)  regular  price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate  if
Please  renew   (or
Street   .
City
I.
4420  29th   St.
..   .  Zip
gift   announcement
enter)   a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  Q
the   enclosed   $5:
State
F.  Stone's  Weekly                   11/17/69
N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published    Bi-Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C. Published  every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at   4420  29th  St., N.W.. Washington. D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription: $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in   Canada;
$10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20 to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED