I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969mar24.pdf

============================================================

Special  Supplement:  A  Plan for  Peace  in  the Middle  East
Scientists  Do  Not  Opt  For  Life  When  Thev  Work  On  New  Means  of  Death
"Without   more   assurance   than   we   now   possess    that
this   generation  has   a   future,  nothing  else   matters.   We
have  got  to  get   rid  of  these  nuclear  weapons.   A  balance
of   terror  is  still   terror.   What  we  are   up  against   is   the
threat  of  this  being  a  generation  of  the  apocalypse.  We've
reached  the  point  of  great  decision, not  only  for  this  genera-
tion   Liut  for  life  on  this  earth.   Our  government,  like  most
governments,   is   obsessed    with   death,   killing   and   being
killed.   We  scientists,  we  opt  for  life."
—Nobel   Prize   Winner   George   Wald   at  MIT   during   the
•nationwide   "research   stoppage:"   on   the   nation's    campuses
March   It,  as  reported   next  day   in   the  Boston  Globe.
/. P. Stone's  Weekly
\Trttit   Dith/irha/1   T^i-\\/oal>l\\                        ^^
Now  Published  Bi- Weekly
VOL.  XVII,  NO.  6
MARCH   24,   1969
101
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.
20  CENTS
Sorry,  It's  the  Same  Old  Tricky D-—y
I   have   often   said   that   I  felt   that   the   first   country
to   deploy   an   effective   ABM   system    and   an   effective
ASW   [anti-submarine]  system  is  going   to  control  this
world militarily."
—Senator    Russell,   who   gave   instant    approval     to
Nixon's  ABM  decision,  speaking  during  last  year's  mili-
tary   appropriations    hearings,   as   quoted    by    Mansfield
March-  7 in  a  speech  against  the  ABM  and  its    supposedly
"defensive"    purpose.
Mr.   Nixon   was  too  clever  for  his  own  good   at  his  press
conference   of   March    14.    The   very   slickness   of   his   per-
formance  will   deepen   distrust  as  the  truth   begins   to  trickle
out.    He  was  dishonest   about   the   anti-ballistic  missile  as  he
was  dishonest   about   the   war   in   Vietnam.    He   has   stepped
into   the   same   credibility  gap   where    Lyndon   Johnson   de-
stroyed   himself.   His  soft  sell  and  our  hopes  led  us  into  de-
ception.   This  is  the  same  old  tricky  operator.
Bigger   Than  Sentinel
The   impression   he   created   is  that   he   had   whittled   the
ABM  down  to  a  minimal  system  which  would  cost  $1  billion
less  in   the   coming   fiscal   year   than   Johnson's.    But   it   turns
out  that  his  Safeguard   will   be  bigger   and   cost   more   than
Johnson's  Sentinel.   This  came  out  in  the  briefing  that   same
day   at   the   Pentagon    when    Deputy   Secretary   of    Defense
David   Packard   was   asked    (we   quote   p.   14  of   the    official
transcript),   "can   you  explain  why  the  cost  of  your  system  is
nearly   a  billion  and   a  half   more   than   the   previous   system
yet  it  has  possibly   a  half   dozen   complexes   fewer?"    Packard
replied,  "In   order   to  do  the  job  that   we  believe   needs   to
be   done   we  found   it   necessary   to  provide   additional   capa-
bility  in  the  system."   He  explained   that  the  new  plan  would
require-  more  radars  and  more  Sprint   missiles  than  Sentinel;
"more  faces  on  the  PAR  radars"  and   "additional  PAR   and
that  is  a  fairly   extensive  installation."   "But   in  general,"   he
concluded,   "we   are   providing   additional  capability  for   the
Why  Ike  Opposes  The  ABM
"Q:  Would  the   $5  billion  antimissile  missile  system
recently  announced  by  Secretary   McNamara  fall  into
the  President's   category   of   'excessive   arms?'"
"I  wasn't  prepared  for  his  vivid  response.    Five  bil-
lion!   That  was  only  the  beginning,  the  President  said
impatiently.   It  would  buy  a  pilot  establishment,  noth-
ing   else.    And  then  we   would   have  to   go   on  and  on
until   we   had   'the   works.'   He   drew   a   spiral   in   the
air   with  his   forefinger   as   he   talked.    You'd   get   up
into  the  $20  billions,  then  the  $30  billions,  and  the  $40
billions—just    for    the    United    States.     Every   little
town   and   locality   would  insist   on   having   a   shield.
Even  Gettysburg.   And  soon,   too,   all  your  allies   will
insist  on  having  it  ...     Now,  mind  you,  the  President
said,   I   wouldn't  call  it   a   form  of   excessive   arms   if
I  thought  it  would be  effective."  [Emphasis  in  original]
—Eisenhower    interview   in   VISTA,    organ   of   the
United   Nations   Association,  Jan.-Feb.   1968.
* Just  what  the  august  Georgian  meant  by  controlling  the
world   was   not   explained.   In  the   secret   Senate   debate   on
the   ABM  last   Oct.  14,  he   voted   for   the   Sentinel   program
to  make  sure   (he  said)   that  in  the  event  of  a  nuclear  holo-
caust,   any  survivors   would  be  Americans.    "If  we   have   to
start  over  again  with  another  Adam  and  Eve,"  Russell  said,
"then   I  want  them  to  be  Americans."   The  new   pair  would
we  suppose   "control   this  world  militarily",  thus presumably
giving   posthumous   satisfaction  to  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.
2  *
money."    So  the  headlines,  if  Nixon  had   been  frank,  would
have  said  that  he  had  opted  for  a  bigger,  more  costly  system.
The   impression  Nixon   and   Laird   have   conveyed   is  that
since  the  Russians  had  deployed   an  ABM  we  had  to  deploy
one   too.    But  Nixon   is  preparing   to  deploy   a  system  many
times   greater   than   the   already   obsolete   GALOSH    around
Moscow.   Their  system,  a  system  on  which  work  halted  some
time   ago,   protects   only   the   metropolitan   area   of    Moscow.
Nixon's  will  provide  a  city  defense  for  Washington,  a  "thin"
Spartan   cover   for   the   entire   country,   a   thick   defense   for
two  Air   Force  missile  bases  in  Montana   and  North   Dakota,
and   site  acquisition   for   Spartan   and   Sprint   installations  at
nine  other   sites  around  the  country  (see   the  Pentagon  chart,
significantly   called    "Modified    Sentinel"   which   was   shown
at  Packard's  briefing  and   reproduced   on  p.   3  of   the    Wash-
ington   Star,   March    15).    This   escalates   the   arms   race  in
response   to  a  spurious  <7«//-missile  gap  just  as  Kennedy  eight
years  ago  escalated  the  arms  race  in  response   to  a non-existent
missile   gap.
The   dimensions  of  that  escalation,  when   the   full   truth  is
known,  will  prove  enormous.  Mr.  Nixon,  perhaps inadvertent-
ly,   let  slip  a  figure  which  has  hitherto  been   classified.     He
said  the  Russians  had  deployed   67  anti-missiles around   Mos-
(Contini/ed   on   Page   Tiro)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  24, ll>69
A  New  Anti-Arms  Race—10,000  U.S.  Anti-Missiles  to  the  Soviets 67?
(Continued   from   Page    One)
cow.    How  many, will  we  deploy?   The  question   came  up  at
Packard's   briefing—
Q.  Can  you   tell   us   how   many   Spartan   missiles   and
how   many   Sprint   missiles   in  total  would  be  in  this?
Mr.  Packard:  Yes,  I  think   so.
Mr.  Fryklund   (information   officer):   No.   you   can't.
Mr.  Packard:  No,  I  can't.   That  is   classified.
Q.  Can  you  tell   us   how  many  will  be  at   each  site?
Mr.  Packard:  No,  we  can't   tell  you  that.
Some  estimates  were  provided   by  the  physicist  Dr.   Ralph   E.
Lapp  March   20  at  Washington    State   University.   Dr.   Lapp
said  the  number   of  Spartans   deployed  for   a  "thin"  area  de-
fense   across   the   country   would   probably   be   calculated    "to
deal  with  no  more  than   100  attacking  missiles"  and  the  Spar-
tans  would   number   in  the   "low   hundreds",   i.e.  perhaps   two
or  three  for  each  incoming  missile.   That  will  already  be  sev-
eral  times  the  67  the  Russians  have  deployed.
Just  Two  Minuteman   Sites?
What  about   Sprints?    Here  we  come  to  another  of   Mr.
Nixon's   deceptions.     He   spoke   of   "protecting   two   Minute-
man  sites."   That  sounded  very  minimal  indeed.   It  turns  out,
as  Dr.   Lapp  explained   March   20,  that   the   "two   sites"   are
really   "two   Minuteman   wings   with   a  total   of   35   flights."
Each  "flight",   in  Air   Force  parlance,   is  made  up  of  ten  mis-
siles.    So  this  is  a  total   of   350   missiles,   each   in  a  separate
silo,  or  50  more  than  one-third  of  our  total  Minuteman   force
of   1,000.    If  Nixon   had   been   candid,   the   headlines   would
have  said  that  the  initial  deployment  would   safeguard   a  third
of  our  Minutemen.
How    many   Sprints   would   be   required    to   protect    350
Minutemen?   Dr.  Lapp  gave  a  range  of  estimates,   depending
on   the   size  and   accuracy  of   the   attacking  missile.    He   esti-
mated   that   even   if   the   Russians  achieved   one-quarter   of   a
mile  accuracy  (i.e.  if  they  were  able  to  hit  within  500  yards
of   an   object   5,000   miles   away!)    they   would   need    3   1-
megaton   weapons   for   each   silo   (allowing    for   20%   system
losses  and  95%   kill  probability).   That  would   require    1,000
attacking   missiles.    The   defense,    in   turn,   would    probably
have  to  assign   3  or  more  Sprint   missiles  to  each  hostile  ob-
ject.   That  is  a  total  of  more   than   3,000  Sprints!    Our  total
Minuteman  force  of  1,000  would  require,  by  that   calculation,
9,000  anti-missiles to  protect   them.  This  does  not  count   the
Challenge   Hoover   On  The  King   Killing
"Memphis,  March  15—The  Memphis  public defender,
who  was  a  co-counsel  for  James  Earl  Ray,  said  in  an
interview  this  week  that   he  believes  Ray  might  have
had  help  preceding  the  murder  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Martin
Luther  King,  Jr.   Hugh  W.  Stanton,  who  has  been  the
public  defender  of  Memphis  for  27  years,  said  he   was
not  saying   there   was   a   conspiracy  to  slay   the   civil
rights  leader,  'But  Ray  was  a  dumb  man,  and  I  don't
see   how  it   can  be  that   someone   didn't  help   him,  at
least  with  the  finances.'"
—New  York  Times,  March  16.
We  believe  there  was  a  conspiracy   to  kill  Dr.  King.
J.  Edgar  Hoover,   who  hated  and  once  insulted   King,
should  be  challenged   to  explain   on  what  basis  he  an-
nounced  within  24  hours  of  the  killing  that  there  was
no   conspiracy.     How   could   he   possibly   have   known
so  quickly?   We   believe   the   White   House   should   be
pressured  for  an  investigation   independent  of  the   FBI
and  its  chief.   The  only  virtue   of  the  Memphis  deal  is
that  it  keeps  Ray  alive  some  day  to  tell  the  full  story.
Sprints   for   the   city  of   Washington   or   the   other   sites.    Let
us  put  the  grand  total  at  10,000  as  compared   with  the  Soviet's
67.   That   is  raising  the  ante  sharply,  and   they  must   be  ex-
pected   to  reply  in  kind.
If   you  figure  the   missiles  at   a  half   million   each,   that   is
$5  billion.  At  $1  million  each,  it  would  be  $10  billion.   The
cost  figures  are  not  only  classified  but  not  really  known   since
production   has  hardly   started.    But   this  provides  some   idea
of   the   business   which    A.T.    &   T.'s    Western   Electric,   the
prime  contractor,  and  the  5,000-odd  subcontroctors  can  expect
from  this,  the  largest  procurement   contract  in  military  history.
Now  we  come  to  a  natural  question  and  another   deception.
Laird  has  said  we  needed   an   ABM   as  a  bargaining  card  in
the  coming  arms  negotiations  with  the  Soviet  Union.   Nixon,
too,   talked   in  his  prepared   statement   as   if   this  ABM   pro-
gram  might   be  scaled  down   in  future  arms  talks.   But  when
the  question   was  put   to  him   directly,  his   answer—slippery
as  it  was—indicated  that  the  ABM  was  not  to  be  abandoned,
that  it  was  not  negotiable  within  the  limits  be  is  already   set-
ting  for   the   talks.    "In   any  talks  with   the   Soviet  Union,"
he  was  asked,  "would   you  be  willing  to  consider   abandoning
(Continued   on   Page    Six)
The Fantasy  of  Peking's Irrationality  and Our Own Smug  Nuclear  Posture in the  Far  East
"I  see  no  basis  in  fact  or  theory  for  attributing  a  signifi-
cantly  higher  likelihood  of  irrationality to  Chinese  as  com-
pared  with  Russian  decision-makers  .  .  .   The  preponder-
ant    weight    of    the    evidence   shows    that    the    Chinese
leadership  to  date  has  used  force  beyond  its  borders  with  a
consistently  deliberate  control  to  minimize  the   risks   .  .  .
The  Peking  leadership  does  not  believe  its   vital   interests
include  giving  significant   material  support  to  foreign  revo-
lutionary   movements.   Mao's   doctrine  explicitly   describes
national   liberation   struggles   as   essentially  dependent  on
local  resources  ...      a  'do  it  yourself   philosophy  .  .  .
"If   we  assume  a  burgeoning  nuclear missile  program  in
China,   we   also  assume  the   concomitant   infrastructure   of
technological    modernisation   in   supporting   so   costly   and
-complicated    a   military  system.   This  developmental   proc-
e«s    .   .   .   increases   the    vulnerability   of   their   society,   no
longer   dependent   on   scattered  rice-fields   but   now   locked
into, the   urban   complex,   to  nuclear  attack.   China's  acqui-
siiiim   of   an   operational   nuclear   missile   capability   should
reduce,   not   increase,   the   willingness  of   Peking   to   risk
nuclear  war . . .
"There  is  one  aspect   of  the   Chinese  situation,  however,
which  is  unique  compared  with  our  relationship  with  other
nuclear  powers: we  did  intervene  and  continue  to  intervene
in  the  Chinese  civil  war.   Moreover  in  the  second  Quemoy
crisis  of  1958,  we  provided  the   Chinese  Nationalist   forces
with  8-inch  howitzers  publicly  identified  as  capable  of  fir-
ing  nuclear  shells  .  .  .  Our  nuclear  deployment in  the  West
Pacific  has  taken  on  a  particular  salience  for  Peking  .  .  .
If  we  continue  with  the  ABM  and  its   [anti-Chinese] justi-
fication   we  will  perpetuate the  suspicion  .  .  .  that  we  are
determined    to    maintain    maximum    military    superiority
over  China   to  act  at   will  in  pursuit  of  our  interests  .  .  .
"In  this  perspective the  ABM  is  not  a  guarantee against
Chinese  irrationality   or  miscalculation  but  rather  may   ac-
tually   be   a   further   goad   to   Chinese  asumptions   of   our
malevolence  and  permanent enmity."
—1'rof.   Allen  S.  Wliitiny,  Asmiciatc,  Center  for   Chinese
Studies,   t'liir.  of   Mirlnyai!     Icxfifyiiir/      on   the   AI1M,   Gore
Hnbcoiiiinit/ce   of  Semite   Foreign   Relations   March    13.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  24
A  Draft  Proposal  for Peace  in  the  Middle  East
By   Abe   J.   Nathan
Preamble
1.   THE  PROBLEM BETWEEN  THE  ARAB WORLD  AND  ISRAEL
is  a  world  problem   and   its  constructive solution  deserves  im-
mediate   international  attention.    Because   of   the   suspicions,
tensions,   and   hate   in   the   area   there   is   a   danger   that   any
major   outbreak   of   violence   by  either   side   may   engulf   the
bigger  powers   and   threaten  a  general   war.
2.  An    agreed    settlement    between    Israel   and    the   Arab
states  is  barred  so  long  as  the  Arab  states  insist  on   complete
Israeli   withdrawal   from   territories  occupied   in   the   six   day
war  prior  to  any  talks,  and  Israel  insists  on  direct  negotiations
leading   to   peace   prior   to   any   withdrawal.    This    deadlock
could   be  overcome   if  and   when   each   of   the   involved   com-
munities  can  arrive  at   a  perspective   that   is  mutually  agree-
able  as  a  framework   for  negotiating   the   details  of   a  settle-
ment.    This  objective  is  important  enough   to   deserve   com-
promise  and  magnanimity  from  both  sides.
3.  Failing  this   there   is  a  danger   that   for   generations   to
come   the   peoples   of   the   area   will   find   themselves   living
under  conditions  of  tension  resulting  only  in  increasing  dam-
age  to  life  and  property.    The   younger   generations   on   both
sides,   even   today,   are  growing   up   in  a  destructive   environ-
ment  of  hate  and   suspicion  with   the  result  that  it  might   be
too   late,   as  time   passes,   to   bring   about   any   understanding
between  the  nations  of  the  region.   There  is  an  ever  increas-
ing  danger  of  activist  and   retaliatory  incidents  producing   an
atmosphere  of  greater  tensions and  unyielding attitude, as  well
as  mounting  loss  of  life  and  property  to  all  sides.   Any  hopes
of  progress  either  on  the  Arab  side  or  the  Israeli  side  would
be  hampered   as  the  resources   of   all  concerned   will  have   to
be   used   mainly   in   acquiring   weapons—a   trade   that   would
enrich  only  the  munitions  factories  of   the   big   powers.
4.  There  are  grounds   for  hoping  that  a  solution  could  be
found   among   the  people  of  Israel,  the  Palestinian Arabs  and
the  Jordanians,  provided   that  their  respective  integrity,  sense
of  sovereignty,  and  dignity  as  a  people  could  be  assured   and
respected.
5.  The    framework    for    an   agreement    for    a   Union    of
Jerusalem   is   outlined   here.    This   does   not   purport    to   be
a   complete,    comprehensive    plan,   but   only   a   definition   of
strategic  aspects   which   needs   filling   out   by  specialists  from
the   area.    The   terms  of   a  durable  peace   settlement   and   the
solution  of  the  refugee  problem  are  emphasized   here.   It  is
expected    that   the   solving   of   problems    in   these   areas   will
facilitate   a  basis  for   negotiations   and   the   signing   of   peace
agreements  with  the  Arab  states  of  the  Middle  East.
6.  In  spite  of  what  appears  to  be  on  the  surface  a   difficult
and  tragic  problem  with  no  immediate  solution  in  sight,  there
is  still  an   abundance   of   elements   that   can   help   bring   the
Arab  and  the  Jew  together,   having  faith   that  through   peace
and   cooperation,   the   problems   of   sovereignty,  integrity   and
identity   of   the   peoples   of   the   area   can   be  maintained   and
strengthened.    This   calls   for   the   establishment   of   a   plan
for   unity  between   the   three   States   of   the   Union   as  a  step
towards  the  realization  of  peace  in  the  area.
7.  Let   the   door   be  open   to  any  of   the   countries  of   the
Middle  East  that  wish  to  participate  in  this  unique  oppor-
tunity  to  establish  a  basis  for  equality  for  all  the  peoples   of
this  area.
Part  I
THE  UNION  OF  JERUSALEM
1.  THERE  SHALL  Bn   A  UNION  between  three  separate,  in-
About  The  Author   and  His   Plan
Abe  J.  Nathan,  the  author  of  this  plan  for  peace  in
the  Middle  East,  has  had  an  extraordinary   career.   He
is  a  Jew  of  Persian   origin.   He  was   born  in  Abadan,
Iran,   on   April   29,   1927.    His   family   emigrated    to
India,   as   have   so   many  so-called   "Parsee"   Jews   in
past   centuries.    There   he   was   educated   in   a   Jesuit
school  in  Bombay.   In  World  War  II,  he  was  a  pilot  in
the   Indian   Royal   Air   Force.    In   1948   he   went    to
Palestine   where  he  flew  as  a  bomber-transport  pilot  in
the  Arab-Jewish   war  of   1948  when  Israel  was  estab-
lished.    He   became   an   Israeli   citizen   and   thereafter
for  eight  years  was  a  Captain  in  El  Al,  Israel's  air-
line.   Since   that  time  he  has  operated  an  art   gallery
and   restaurant   in  Tel  Aviv.
On  two  occasions,  Nathan  flew  one-man  "peace"  mis-
sions  to  Egypt  in  an  unsuccessful  effort  to  see  Nasser,
once  on  Feb.  28,  1966  and  again  on  July  28,  1967,  land-
ing  at  Port  Said.   On  his   return   to   Israel   from   this
second  attempt,  he  was  tried  and  convicted  for  illegal
flight   and   served   several    months   in   the   prison    at
Ramallah.   Since  his  release   he  has  spearheaded   spe-
cial  rescue  missions  for  Biafran  relief  in  Israel,   West-
ern  Europe  and  the  United  States.
His  peace  plan,  published  here  for  the  first  time  in
full   in   the   English   language,   appeared  originally  in
Hebrew  in  Maariv,  a  Tel  Aviv  evening  paper  which  has
we   believe   the   largest   circulation    of   any   paper   in
Israel.   It  was  to  be  printed  in  Arabic  during  the  week
of  March  17  in  al-Quds  (the   Holy  City),  the   Arabic
newspaper  published in  Jerusalem,  which  has  been  al-
lowed  wide  freedom  by  the  Israeli   authorities.
We  believe  the  Nathan   plan  offers  a  way  out  of  a
stale   and  hateful  situation,  with  justice  to  both  Arab
and  Jewish  national   aspirations   and  with   recompense
and  a  new  start   for   the   Palestinian   Arabs   uprooted
in  the  1948,  1956,  and  1967  wars.
dependent   sovereign   states  and  peoples,  which  shall  be  calkd
The  Union  of   Jerusalem.
2.  The  geographical  limits  shall  be:
(a)   The   boundaries   of   the   State   of   Israel   as   it   was
before  the  six-day war;
(b)   The    boundaries   of   the   Hashemite    Kingdom   of
Jordan  as  it  is today;
(c)   The    boundaries     comprising     the    area    now   oc-
cupied   by  Israel   west   of  the  Jordan   River  and   the
Gaza   Strip.    The   area   withfn   this   boundary   shall
be  called   the  Palestinian   State.
3.  The  Old  City  and  that  part  of  Jerusalem  known  as  East
Jerusalem   shall   be   the   Capital   of   the   three   states   of   the
Union.   It  is  here  that  the  policies  of  unified  action   between
the  three  states  shall  be  decided.
4.  Making    East   Jerusalem,   including   the   Old   City,   the
capital   will  justify  the  right  of  presence  there  to  the  Jordan-
ians,  the  Palestinians  who  reside  there,  and  the  Israelis.
5.  Each  state  shall  preserve  its  international personality  and
its   system  of   government.
6.  Each  citizen  in  the  Union  has  the  right  to  work  and  to
occupy  public  positions  in  the  Union   administration without
discrimination.
7.  All  citizens are  equal  before  the  law  of  their  own  state
in   their   rights   and   obligations  without   distinction  of   race,
origin,  language,  religion, or  creed.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  24, 1969
Part  II
ADMINISTRATION  OF  THE   UNION
8.   THE   ADMINISTRATION   OF   UNION   affairs   shall   be   as-
sumed   by  a  council  named  the  Union   Council.   It  shall  be
composed  of  the  Heads  of  the  member states.
9.  The   Chairmanship  of   the   Council   shall   be   assumed
alternatively  by  the  head   of" each  member  state  for   a  period
that  will  be  decided  upon   by  the  Union  Council.
10.  The  Union  Council  shall  include  an  equal  number  of
representatives   from   the  three   states,  and   their  duration  of
membership  and  their  functions  will  be  decided  upon  by  the
Union Council.
11.  The  decisions of  the  Union  Council must  be unanimous.
12.  The   budget   of   the  Union  administration will   be  de-
cided  upon  by  the  Union  Council.  This  budget  will  be  sub-
stantiated  by  contributions of  each  member  state.
13.  The   Union   Council   will   define   the   policies  of   the
Union  with  regard  to  economic,  defense,  political  and cultural
problems.
Part  III
ADMINISTRATION    OF  THE   CAPITAL
14.   THE   CAPITAL   SHALL   BE   ADMINISTERED   by   a  council
whose   heads  will  be   representatives  of   the   three   States.
15.  A   council  of   Religious  Affairs   comprised   of   Jewish,
Muslim,   and   Christian  representatives,  in   charge   of   their
respective  religious  institutions  and  holy  places,  will  act  as  a
special  department of  the  administration.
16.  The  internal  administration of  the  capital  shall  be  con-
ducted   by  the  people   of   the  -area.
17.  Only  citizens of  the  Union  may  be  permanent  residents
of    the   capital.
18.  Only   citizens   of   the   Union   may  be  entitled  to   own
land  and/or   property  within  the  limits  of   the  capital.
19.  Residents will  pay  taxes  to  their  respective  governments.
20.  The   administrative   costs   of   the   capital  will   be   paid
out  of  the  municipal council  budget.
21.   Close  cooperation  will  be  established  with  the  City  of
Jerusalem  with  respect  to  sanitation,  water,  postal  and  police
facilities.
22.  Only  permanent  residents  of   the   capital  may  be   en-
titled   to  hold   office   in  or  be  involved  with  the   running  of
the  administration  of  the  capital.
23.  Permanent  residents  are  entitled   to   vote  and/or   run
for  pffice  in  those  governments in  which  they  hold citizenship.
24.  The  construction  and  upkeep  of  all  buildings  used   for
the  administration  will  be  planned  by  the  council  and   paid
for  jointly  by  the  three states.
25.  No  punishment  may  be  imposed  on  any  citizen   except
by  virtue  of   the   law   of   the   country  where   the   crime  was
committed.
Part  IV
GOVERNING  BODIES   OF  THE   UNION
26.  THE  FOLLOWING  DEPARTMENTS  will  be  responsible   to
the  Union  Council  and  all  their  decisions  must  be  submitted
for   ratification   by  the,Union  Council:
Economic    Department
27.  Developmental   and   economic   stability  in   the   Union
must   ensure   the   freedom   of   travel  and   trade  without  any
barriers  to  all  citizens  who  will  have  the  joint  use  for   trade
of  all  airports, highways  and  seaports  in  the  Union.
28.  The   economic   development   of   the   Palestinian  State
will  be  accelerated  by  the  execution  of  the  refugee  rehabilita-
tion  plan, outlined in  Articles  55-64.
29.  Each  State  will  prepare   five-year   economic  plans  that
will   modernize  and   develop   the   agricultural   and   industrial
output   of   the  three  States.   These   plans  must  be  submitted
to  the  Union  Council  for   ratification.    The   ultimate  goal  of
these  plans  shall  be  equal  levels  of   industrial  and   agricul-
tural   developments  and   standards  of   living  in   all   parts  of
the  Union.
30.  No   citizen,   Jirm,   or   other   organization  of   one  State
may  purchase  or   otherwise  acquire  title  to   land   in  another
State  of   the   Union.    Cooperation   in   taxation  systems,  as  a
result  of   inter-State  trade  and   other   spheres  of  mutual  eco-
nomic  problems  shall  be  facilitated  by Joint  Boards  of  experts
in  which  each  State  will  be  adequately  represented.
31.  A  special  committee  appointed   by  the  Union  Council
will   draw   up   plans   to   deal   with   problems   created   by   the
presence  of  the  various  currencies in  the  member  States.   This
committee  would  also  prepare  a  program  for  custom clearance
between  the  member  States.
32.  The  Economic  Department  will  also  draw  up  plans  for
the  joint  exploration   of   natural   resources   and   development
of  trade  between  the  member  States  and   abroad.
33.  All  major  programs  of  the  Economic  Department   must
seek  ratification  by  the  Union  Council.
34.  The    Economic   Department    will   be   headed    by   an
equal   number   of   representatives   from   each   member   State
and  will  be  appointed   to  the  Department   by  their  respective
States.
Defense  Department
35.  The   Union   Council   will   coordinate   external   defense
for  the  Union.
36.  There  will  be  two  army  commands,  one  headed  by  the
Jordanian   Chief   of   Staff   and   the  other   by  the   Israeli   Chief
of  Staff.    A  joint  administration  headquarters  will  be   located
at  the  Union  capital.   Their  function  is  to  plan   and   insure
the  security  of  the  Union,  from   outside  aggression.
37.  The  separate  armies  would  be  maintained  and  paid  for
by  their   respective   States  unless   decided   otherwise   by  joint
agreement.
38.  No  army  would  enter  territory  of  another   State  unless
requested   by  the  respective  government,   and   is   unanimously
approved   by  the   Union    Council.
39.  The   area   comprising   the   Palestinian    State   will   not
maintain  an  army  even  though  Palestinian  citizens  may  volun-
teer   or   be  recruited   into   either   Jordanian   or   Israeli   armed
forces.   The   Palestinian   State  would,   however,   have  its  own
police  force  for  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order  within  the
State   and   will   be   paid   for   by  and   be   responsible   to   the
Palestinian  government.    More  detailed  plans  of    cooperation
could   be   worked   out   by  the   Joint   Chiefs   of   Staff   in   con-
sultation with  the Union  Council.
40.  The  Union   Council   will   be  advised   by  the  Chiefs  of
Staff   on  matters   of   defense   in  order   to  ensure   the  security
and   safety  of  the   member   states  in  the  Union.    The   policy
to   be   followed    concerning    general    mobilization   and   civil
defense  in  time  of  war  will  be  outlined  by  the  Union   Council.
Political  Department
41.  The  Political  Department   shall  be  composed   of  repre-
sentatives  of  the  three  member   States.
42.   All  plans  and  decisions  must  receive   ratification   from
the  Union  Council.
43.  All   international  treaties  and   pacts  that   each   of   the
member   States  had   signed   before   the   establishment   of   the
Union   will   remain   valid   with   respect   to   the   State  which
signed  them  without  binding  any  of  the  other  member  States.
However,   all  treaties  entered   into  by  one   or  more  member
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  24, 1969
States  after  the  establishment  of  the  Union   must  be   ratified
by the Union  Council.
44.   Complete  and  separate  sovereignty  in  each  of  the  sepa-
rate  States  must  be  guaranteed  to  enable  the  function  of   sep-
ate administration.
45.  Political interference in  the  internal  political  affairs  of
the  separate  governments   by  other   States  in  the  Union   shall
be  prohibited.
46.  The   foreign   policies   of   member   States   shall   be  co-
ordinated   by  the   Union   Council.
47.   A   system   for   diplomatic  and   consular  representation
of   the  Union   abroad   shall   be  decided   upon   by  the   Union
Council,  be  it  separate  or  unified.    [Each  member   State  may
maintain   a  separate  diplomatic  establishment,  but   any  mem-
ber  shall  be  free  to  combine  representation  with  one  or  more
member  States of  the Union].
Cultural   Department
48.  The   Cultural  Department   shall   be  composed   of   rep-
resentatives  of  each  of  the  three  member  States.
49.  Each   member    State   will   be   the   author   of   its   own
cultural   program,   in  pursuance  of   its  own  historic  and   cul-
tural   identity.   The   official   languages  of  the  Union   shall   be
Arabic,  Hebrew,  and  English.
50.  This  department   shall   be  responsible   for   preparing  a
general  education   policy  and   for   outlining   educational   pro-
grams   that   will   encourage   the   maintenance   of   each   State's
cultural  identity.
51.  This  department   will  prepare   a   unified   program   for
technical  and  vocational  education  in  the  three  member   States
of  the  Union.
52.  The   Cultural   Department   will   be   responsible   to   the
Union   Council   and   will   coordinate   the   efforts   of   various
cultural  organizations  in  the  member   States.   After  an  interim
period,   plans  should  be  drawn   by  the  representative   of   the
three   States   to  have   all  education,  health   and   soc
;
  il  service
expenditures   to  be  based  on  a  fixed  per  capita  rate—that   is,
equal   money  will  be  allocated   to  educating   the   children   of
Israel,  Palestine,  and  Jordan.
53.  In  all  schools   throughout   the  Union  the  study  of  He-
brew,  Arabic,  and  English  will  be  compulsory,  and  the  studies
of  Arab  and  Jewish   history  will  be   encouraged.
54.  This  Department  will  be  responsible   for   formulating
a  system  for   free  exchange   of  professors,   teachers,   and   stu-
dents  between   schools  and  universities  of  the  member   States
of  the  Union.
Part  V
THE  REFUGEE   PLAN
55.   No     SOLUTION   TO   THE   MIDDLE    EAST   PROBLEM    is
possible  without  solving  the  problem   of  rehabilitation  of  and
compensation    to   the   refugees   from   military  and   political
hazards  since   1948.
56.  Firstly,  the  State  of   Israel,  with  assistance  from   other
governments,   shall   create  a  Refugee   Fund   of   four   hundred
million   dollars.    This   sum   exceeds,   with   interest,   over   the
past  twenty  years,  the  total  value  of  all  the  land  and  property
of  the  Arab  refugees  who  either  left  or  fled  from  the territory
of  the  State  of  Israel  during  the  1948  war.
57.  The   fund   shall   be   utilized   to   pay   compensation   to
those   who   seek   compensation   and/or   shall  be   invested   for
general   economic   development   in   the  Palestinian  State,   for
homes,   hospitals,  schools,   roads,  and   local  industries.
58.  The  creation  of  a  Peace  Corps  can  play  a  vital  part  in
the  rehabilitation   of  the  refugees.    A  two  thousand  man  Peace
Corps  of  Jews  and  Arabs  shall  be  created  to  implement   the
program.
59.  The   Peace   Corps   will  help   in   the  hospitals,  schools,
and   farms   and   with   the   general   resettlement   of   refugees
anywhere within the  Union.
60.  The  members  of  the  Peace  Corps  may  consist  of  those
conscripted   Israelis  who   are  serving  in   the   Israeli  army,  or
they   may   include   recruits   from   the   Jordanian   army.   One-
year   out   of   the   total   compulsory  military   service   will   be
devoted  entirely  to  the  Peace  Corps.
61.  Citizens  of   the  Union   may  also  volunteer  to  serve  in
the  Peace  Corps.
62.  The   Peace  Corps  will  be  paid  entirely  by  the  State  of
Israel.
63.  The   right   of   the   Palestinian  Arab   to   reacquire   his
home  or  land  could   be  planned  in  the  following   manner.
A)   When   an  Arab  citizen   puts   claim  to  a  house  that
he   owned   before  May   15th,   1948,   and   the   house
still  exists,  he  shall  remain  the  owner  of  the   house
and  be  entitled to  receive all  the  rent collected by  the
Israeli   Custodian   of   Arab   Property   over   the   past
twenty  years.   While  he  remains -the  owner  he  may
not  have  the  right  to  evict  the  tenant  of  the  same
house  as  long   as  the  rent  is  being  paid.
B)   In  the  case  of  an  Arab  who  owned   a  house  before
May  15th,  1948,  and  that  house  does  not  exist any-
more  as  a  house,  then   financial   compensation  must
be  paid,  taking  into  account  the  value  of  that  same
property  and  the  interest  thereof,  in  the  past  twenty
years.
C)   In   the   case   of   an   Arab   who   owned   land   before
May  15,  1948,  then  if  this  land  has  been  plowed,  or
been   worked  on,   or  houses   have  been  built  on   it,
then  he  would  be  compensated  financially  as  in  the
previous   section.    If   an   Arab   owned   land   before
May  15th,  1948,   and  this  land  has  not  been  either
plowed,    irrigated   or   worked   on,   then   unless   this
particular  land  is  considered  as  territory essential  to
the  security  of  the  State,  this  land  must  be  returned
to  his  custody.   Any  Arab  so  returning  to  his  land
in  Israel  will  be  subject  to  the   laws  of  Israel.
64.  Similar  principle  shall  apply  to  Jews   and   others   who
before  May  15th,  1948,  fled  from  land,  homes,  or  properties
in  the  territory  occupied  by  Jordan   after    1948.
Part  VI
65.  IT  Is  HOPED  that  the  above  proposal   will  satisfy   the
demands   and    establish   the    integrity,   sovereignty  and    the
identity   of   Israel,   the   People   of   Palestine  and   the   State  of
Jordan.    In  addition  to  the  above  proposal,   it  must  be  nec-
essary  to  make  the  following  recommendations  that  may  help
in   setting   up   peace  negotiations  with   the   rest   of   the   Arab
world.
66.  A)   Demilitarization  of   the   Sinai   after   Israeli   with-
drawal.
B)   Freedom   of   passage   to   all  shipping   in   the   Suez
Canal  and  Straits  of  Tiran  guaranteed  by  the  Four
Powers  (U.S.A.,  U.S.S.R.,  etc.)
C)   With   respect   to   the   Golan   Heights,    Israel   will
maintain   those  positions  along   the   Heights   con-
sidered   strategic  for   the   maintenance  of   her   se-
curity   but   will   not   exploit  or   use   the   land   for
gain   or   profit.    Any   modifications   of   this  status
quo  will  be  made  only  with  the   joint   agreement
of   the   governments    of   Israel   and   Syria.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  24, 196!)
Why   A  First  Strike  Would  Be  Sure  Suicide  for  Russia  or  China
(Continued   from    Page     Two)
the  ABM  program  altogether  if  the  Soviets  showed  a  similar
willingness   or   indeed,   if   they  showed   a   readiness   to   place
limitations   on   offensive   weapons?"   Mr.   Nixon   replied   that
while  he  was  ready  to  consider  both   offensive  and  defensive
weapons,  "the  arms  talks,  that  at  least  preliminarily have  been
discussed,   do   not   involved   limitations   or  reductions.     [Our
emphasis]    They   involve  only   freezing   where   we   are."    If
"where   we   are"    includes   this   ABM   and   the   MIRVs   and
the  rest  of  the  huge  expansion   we  have  in  the  works,   what
is  there  to  negotiate?
In  the  light  of  this  reply,   the  ABM   is  not   a  bargaining
card  at  all  but  an  attempt  to  commit  the  country  to  an  ABM
system   in  advance   of   talks.    "The    abandoning   of   the  entire
system,"   Mr.   Nixon   went   on   to   say,   "particularly   as  long
as  the  Chinese  threat  is  there,   I  think  neither  country  would
look  upon  with  much   favor."    If  the  ABM  is  to  go  on  "as
long  as  the   Chinese   threat  is  there"  then   it  will  go  on   for
a  long  time  indeed.    For  our  military,  the  mere  existence  of
China   is   a   threat.    Mr.   Nixon   went   on   to   make    another
tricky  assertion.    Mr.  Nixon   said  the  Soviet  ABM  had   been
deployed   originally  against  the   U.S.   but  "today   their  radars,
from   our   intelligence,   are  also   directed   toward   Communist
China."    When   Senator   Gore   opened   his   hearings   on   the
ABM  March   6  he  said  .that  some   officials   had   declared   that
the   Soviet   ABM   was   aimed   at   China   as  well   as  the   U.S.
but  "this  statement  flatly  contradicts   what  the  Foreign  Rela-
tions   Committee    was   told   by   another    equally    responsible
source  just  a  few  days  ago."    That  witness,  it  has  since  leaked
out,  was  none  other  than  Richard  Helms,   head   of  the  CIA.
They   Can't  Be  That  Crazy
These  are  only  a  few  of  the  strands  in  this  thick   woven
web  of  deception.    Let  us  take  another.   If  the  Chinese  threat
is   the   essential   factor,   as  the   words   we   have   just   quoted
indicate,  then   why  is  Nixon   putting  his  first  ABMs   around
the   Minuteman   instead   of   the   cities?    The   Chinese   would
have  to  be  twice  as  crazy  as  our  Joint   Chiefs  of   Staff   would
like  us  to   think   they   are  to   justify   that   deployment.     The
latest   estimates  are  that  they  may  have  18  or   20  ICBMs   in
'  a  few  years.   It  would  be  insane  for  them  to  attack  the   U.S.,
which  can  deliver  4200  warheads,  with  their  puny  18  or  20.
They  would  have  to  be  many  times  crazier  to  use  their  hand-
ful    against   our    1,000    Minutemen.    China's   puny   handful
have   only   one   possible   military  significance.   Our  military
wants  an  ABM  against  them   so  it  can  threaten,   or  make,  a
first  strike   against   China   without   fear   of   retaliation.   That
handful  might  be  used  in  one  last  dying  attempt  to  hit  back
at  some  American  city.   If  these  military  lunatics  of  ours  are
thinking  of   a  Chinese   attack,  the   only  attack  remotely   con-
ceivable  would   be   a  retaliatory  attempt   against  one   or   two
of   our   cities  if   we  were   destroying   China   in   a  first  strike. ,
(Even   this   is   highly   improbable   because   our   first   target
Mustn't  Let  Our  Heroes  Get  Bored
ABOARD  USS  NEW  JERSEY,  Off South  Vietnam-
Crew   members  of   the   Battleship   New   Jersey   do  not
think  in  terms  of  "retaliatory  strikes"  but  almost   all
of   them  seem   anxious  for   an   excuse   to   resume   the
shelling  of  North  Vietnam.   The  reason,  as  several  of
them   explained,  is   that   lobbing   16-inch   shells   into
targets   in  South  Vietnam  is  just   too  boring  in  com-
parison  with  the  adventurous  uncertainty  of   duty  off
North  Vietnam.   "Here  we're  doing  as  much  damage,"
said  fire  control  technician  Robert  Troxel,  a  mustached,
bespectacled  20-year  old  who  pulls  the  brass   triggers
that   fire   the   16-inchers,  "but   it   doesn't   seem   glori-
ous."   .  .  .  The  ship's   16-inch  shells   weigh   nearly   a
ton  apiece  and  can  be  fired  on  targets   20  miles  away.
—Donald  Kirk  in  the  Washington   Star,  March   9
would   be  their  missiles).   To  safeguard   against  such  a  con-
tingency  a  city  defense  is  needed.   But  Mr.  Nixon  now  says
no   city  defense  is  possible.    So  how   does   his   ABM   protect
us   from   China ?
The   contradictions  are   as  great   if   the   real  enemy   is   the
Soviet   Union.    At   one   point   in   his   press   conference   Mr.
Nixon  said,  quite  correctly,  of  the  Russians,  "They  have  al-
ways  thought  in  defensive  terms,   and   if  you  read   not   only
their  political  leaders,  but  their  military leaders,  the  emphasis
is  on  defense."   If  they  think  in  terms  of  defense,   why  make
our   plans  on   the   assumption   that   they   might   make   a  first
strike?    An   attempt   at   a   first   strike   would   be   as  certain
suicide  for  them  as  it  would  be  for  the  Chinese.   Do  we  think
the  Russians,  too,  are  irrational?   Mr.  Nixon   said  we  had  to
deploy  ABM's  around  our  Minutemen  to  make  our   "deterrent
capability   credible."    He   talked   as  if   we  had   no   other   de-
terrent    but    these    land-based    ICBMs.     But   what    of    our
Polaris   submarines,   on   which   billions  have   been   spent,   to
give  us  an   invulnerable  second   strike  capacity?    Even   if   an
enemy  could  wipe  out  every  U.S.   ICBM   in  one   swift   blow,
it  would   face  certain  destruction   from   these  submarines,  al-
ways   on   the   prowl,   hidden    in   the   seas   and   much    closer
to  the  borders  of  the  Soviet  Union.
We  can  deliver  4200  warheads  averaging   1  megaton   each,
more  than   four   times  their   total   capacity.   Our   land-based
missiles  can   deliver   1700.    Our   Polaris   submarines  can   de-
liver  656.   Our  third  deterrent  force,  the  Strategic  Air   Com-
mand,  can  deliver  the  rest,  about   1800   warheads.   These  are
the   officially   published   U.S.   figures.*
(Continued   on  Page  Seven)
'•'  For  a  fuller account  pf  our  stupendous  destructive  power
power   see   my   artkle   "Nixon   and  The   Arms   Race:   How
Much   Is   Sufficiency?"   in   the   New   York   Review  of   Books
for  March  27,  written  before   Nixon's   decision  to   go  ahead
with  the  ABM.
The  Truth  Nixon   Tried  To  Distort   About  The  War  In  Vietnam
Mr.  Nixon  was  as  tricky  on  the  war  in  Vietnam  as  he
was  on  the  ABM  at  his  March  14  press  conference.   When
asked  whether  we  had  not  stepped  up  the  war,  he  said  we
had  "no  other   choice  but  to   try   to   blunt  the  offensive!"
The   Washington   Post   found   this   too   much   to   swallow.
"The   President,"   it  said   in  an  editorial  next  day,  "might
have  enlarged   the  citizens'   understanding  of   the   realities
of   the   war  if   he  had  admitted  that   the   Americans  have
been  on  the  offensive  for  the  past  six  months."   While  the
other  side  withdrew  troops  after  the  bombing  halt  Oct.  31,
battalion-sized   attacks   from   our   side   rose   from   727   in
November  to  956  in   December  to  1,077  in  January,  an  in-
crease   of   almost   48 '/
f
     in   two   months.    The    figures    on
battalion-sized   attacks  from   the   other   side   are  classified,
to  hide  the  realities  from  the  U.S.  public.   The  fact  is  that
there  was  only  one  battalion-sized  attack  in  each  of   those
three  months  from  the  other  side.   The  enemy  offensive   is
a  reaction  to  ours,  not—as   Nixon  implied—the  other  way
around.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  21,, 1969
The  ABM Would  Prove  to  Be A  Whole  Series  of Electronic  Maginot  Lines
(Continued   from    Page    Six)
If   an  enemy  destroyed  two  of   these  deterrents,  he  would
still  face  destruction  at  the  hands  of  the  third.   If   only  100
of  our  4200  warheads  survived   a  first  attack,  that  would  be
enough    (according   to   McNamara's    final   posture  statement
last  year)   to  destroy  59%   of  Soviet  industry  and  37  million
people  in  one  swift  counter-blow.  That  is  half  again  as  many
Soviet  people  who  died   in  World  War   II,  and  it  does  not
include  those  who  would   die  after   the  lirst  24  hours   from
wounds,   radiation,  hunger   and   despair   in  the  atomic  ruins.
The    idea   that   the   defense-minded   Russians   would    try   a
first  strike  against  such   odds   is  a  nightmare   dreamed   up  by
the  Strangeloves  of   the  military-industrial complex   to  create
a   market   for   its  fantastic   wares.    Mr.   Nixon   has   used   the
highest   office   in  the  land  to  support  their  preposterous  and
enormously   expensive   nonsense.
The  Keys  To  All  This  Nonsense
To  understand   the  folly  of  the  ABM  one  need   only   keep
in  mind  five  general   propositions.     The  first  is  that   in   the
game  of  nuclear  "cops  and  robbers"  the  offense  can  think  up
an  endless  number  of  relatively   inexpensive   gimmicks—from
penetration   aids   and   MIRVs   and   changes    in   trajectory—
each   of   which   forces   the   defense   into   complex   and   costly
counter-measures.    The   ABM   defense   is  like  a  whole   series
of   Maginot   Lines,   each   of   which   can   easily  be  outflanked
and   rendered   useless.    The   second    is  that   the   offense  can
concentrate   its   forces   while   the   defense   must   spread   itself
thin.    An   enemy  can  concentrate   all  his   missiles  on   one  or
two  cities  for   a  retaliatory  blow.    The   ABM   defense   has  to
have   enough   protection    for   every   city   and   every   major   in-
dustrial  and  military  area  sufficiently   large  to  match  any  such
concentration  of  forces.   If  an  enemy  only  has  10  missiles  we
have  to  put  three   times  as  many  anti-missiles  at  every   point
we  have  to  defend.   The  odds  are  with  the  attacker.   If  one
warhead   gets  through,  that  is  the  end  of  the  area   defended.
The  attacker  only  needs  one  more   missile  to  overwhelm   the
defense   in   this  game   of    one-upmanship.
The   third  proposition   is  that,   contrary  to   Mr.   Nixon,   it
Psychological   Byproducts   of   the  ABM
".  .  .  Deployment  of  the  ABM  provides  a  continuing
urgent   demand  for   a  larger   share   of   U.S.   resources
by  the  military-industrial  complex  .  .  .  Since  these  de-
mands  also  subtract  resources  from  domestic  programs
—many  of  which  are  frequently  looked  upon  with  dis-
favor  as  being  'socialistic'  in  their  effect,  at  least  by
some  ABM  supporters—ABM    spending   has  a   double
value  .  .  .  Deployment of  an  ABM  system    encourages
continuing  anxiety  by  citizens   about   possible   nuclear
attack,  a  factor  helpful  in  maintaining  the  kind  of  cold
war  attitudes   so   profitable  to  the  military-industrial-
political  complex.   Such  anxiety  inhibits   any   possible
major  shift  in   policies  leading  to   more   peaceful   co-
existence   .   .   .   The   real   purpose   of   the   ABM,  thin
or  thick,  is  to  extend   for  a  few   more  years   the  illu-
sion  of  the  generals  and  their  friends  that  the   power
of   the  Pentagon   can  enforce  U.S.  policies  around  the
world."
—Brown   (D.   Cal)   in   the   House   Mtfrch    IS,   one  of
the   best   speeches   made   in   Congress   on   the    ABM.
is  more,   not   less,   difficult   to  defend   Minuteman   bases   than
it   is  to  defend   cities.    The   firing   of   our   ABMs   would,   as
Dr.   Lapp   explained   in  a  speech   at  Kansas   State  University
March   12,  foul  up  the  electronic  circuitry  of   the   computers
and   guidance   controls   on   which   Minuteman   depends.     We
may  "black-out"  our  own  missile  forces  and  computers  in  the
effort    to   defend    them.     The    fourth    proposition    is   that
if   we   saw   a   first   strike   coming—and    a   first   strike   would
be  a  mass  of  weapons—we  would  hardly leave  our  Minutemen
in  their  silos  to  wait  and   see  how  our   ABMs   would   work.
We  would  fire  them  off  at  the  enemy  in  the  15  or  20 minutes
of  warning  time  that  would   allow.   The   enemy  would  only
hit   empty   holes   and   we   would   only   be   defending   empty
holes.   The  fifth  and  final  proposition  is  that  we  still  do  not
know   how   much   damage   these   defenses  would   do   to  our-
selves.   The   Spartans  could  blind  hundreds  of   thousands  of
our  own  people  in  the   area   defended.    The   Sprints  would
create   harmful   blast   and    radiation   effects    if   they   hit    the
(Continued   on   Page   Eight)
Scientist   Explains  How  Sentinel   Is  More  Likely  to  Foul  Up  Than  Protect  ICBM  Bases
"Should  the  U.S.  deploy  interceptory  missiles   to  protect
Minuteman  sites  these  would  be  concentrated   in  six   geo-
graphical  areas   with  a  total   area  of   some   50,000  square
miles.   The  deployment  of  missiles  to  defend  such  a limited
area  raises  some  critical  questions  about  the  feasibility  of
ABM  systems  for  hard  point  defense  .  .  .
"The   use  of   ABM  systems   to   protect   Minuteman  sites
could   prove  hostile   to   effective   launching  of   Minuteman
missiles.   If  Spartans  are  used  for  high  altitude intercepts
the  U.S.  may  generate  its   own  black-out. But  apart  from
radar  effects  one  must   consider   radiation-induction   effects
from  nuclear bursts.  I  have in  mind  phenomena of  the  EMP
(electromagnetic    pulse)   type   in    which    high    frequency
oscillations   are   produced   by   asymmetric   behavior  of   the
nuclear  burst.   These  oscillations  can  induce  excessive cur-
rents  in  electronic   circuitry,  especially   in  such  devices  as
computers   and   guidance  controls  aboard   Minuteman  mis-
siles.   An  ICBM  is  much  more  vulnerable  to  nuclear weapon
effects   during   its   boost   phase  than   the   ICBM  warhead
during  its  reentry  phase.    I  find   it  difficult   to  believe  that
the  U.S.  Air   Force  is  enthusiastic  about  the  use  of  Army
missiles  to  defend  Minuteman  sites.
"Too  often  the  problem  of  ABM  interception   of  an  ICBM
warhead  is   pictured  as   a  single   event  in  which  one  ABM
strikes  at  a  single  warhead.  If  we  try  to  visualize  a  first
strike  at  Minuteman  sites  we  must  picture  it  as  a  multi-
tude  of  hostile  warheads  compressed  in  rather  constricted
threat  corridors  and  compressed  in  a  time  band  of   a   few
minutes  at  most  . . .
"While  proponents  of  ABM  defense  of  ICBM  bases  have
not   indicated  deployment  plans  these   would   be  evident  to
the  Soviet   Union   by  orbital   inspection.    Thus   the  Soviets
would  know  whether  only  part  of  the  Minuteman  force   is
to   be  heavily   defended   with   many   Sprints  or   the  whole
six   complexes  are   to   be   defended.
"The   time-space  concentration   of   a   first   strike  attack
on   ICBM   bases   would   necessitate  high-density   Sprint   de-
fense   in   which   interceptors   would   be   vectored  to   hostile
warheads  by  sophisticated radars.  It  is  doubtful  if  Sentinel
type  radar  facilities  could  handle  the  traffic  and  discrimin-
ation   problems  of   a  massive   attack."
—Dr.  Ralph   E.  Lapp   at   Kaunas   State   U.,  March  12.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

7.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  March  24,     IffOS
The  Real—and  Sinister—Meaning  of  Laird's  "Strategy    Gap"
(Continued   fro/a    Page   Sei'en)
oncoming  missiles  below  a  certain  level,  let  us  say  10  miles.
In  a  nuclear  bombardment,  offense  and  defense  would  mingle
and   the  defense  might  only  stoke   the   fires   of   the   very   hell
the  offense  had  ignited.
The  Dream  Of  A  Safe  First   Strike
In   deciding   to  go   ahead   with  the  ABM   Mr.   Nixon   has
entered   the  country  in  a  nuclear  rat   race  which  must   prove
ever  more  expensive  as  we  seek   constantly   to  "improve"   it
in  response   to  enemy  counter-measures.    Mr.  Nixon  tried  to
give   the   impression   that   these   measures   were   purely  defen-
sive.   But  the  Russians  have  said  all  along   that  their  ABMs
around   Moscow   are  purely   defensive   too;   a   system   around
their  capital   is  certainly  not   a  preparation   for   a   first   strike.
Yet  we  are  responding  with  this  huge  ABM  program  on  the
ground  that  our  deterrent  is  threatened  by  the  Moscow  ABM
and  by  the  buildup  in  the  number  of  Russion  ICBMs  which  is
their   response   to  our   decision  in  September    1967   to   deploy
Sentinel.   Mr.  Nixon   spoke  as  if  his  ABM  system  was  tenta-
tive.   So  it  is  but  only  in  the  sense   that  the  Pentagon   knows
it  is  inadequate.   "Each  phase  of  the  deployment,"  Mr.  Nixon
said   in   his   prepared    statement   on   March    14,   "will   be  re-
viewed  to  insure  that  we  are  doing  as  much  as  necessary"  and
to   "take   maximum   advantage   of   the   information   gathered
from   the  initial  deployment   in  designing   the  later  phases  of
the  program."   This  signals  annual  expansion  and   "improve-
ment."   There  is  no  end  to  the  billions  this  monstrous   folly
can   eat   up.     Its   worst   aspect   is  that   our   military,   as   the
Russell   remark   we   quoted   at   the   beginning   of   this   article
shows,   still  dream   of   a  perfect   missile  defense.   This  would
enable  them  to  threaten  a  first  strike  with  impunity  and   thus
dictate   to   the   world.    This   is  what   Laird   was   hoping   for
when   he  wrote  of   a  "strategy    gap."
We   have  only  scratched   the  surface  of  the   tricky  presen-
tation   by  Mr.   Nixon   and   Defense   Secretary   Packard.    The
latter   turns  out   to  be  another   devious   character   out   of   the
electronics  business  in  which  he  made  his  $300,000,000  for-
tune;   his   liberal   sentiments   on   arms   reduction   and   social
The   Truth   From   An   ABM   Contractor
"Skepticism  about  whether  the  Sentinel  would  work
as   designed  is   so   widespread  that   even   some  of   the
contractors  are  asking  that  the  ABM  not  be  deployed
at  this  time.   A  scientist  for  a  company  which  presently
has   such   contracts   with   the   Department   of   Defense
was   in  my   office   the  other  day   and  said  he  had  been
authorized  by  his  employer  to  come  to  Capitol  Hill  and
tell   Members   of   Congress   that   the   Sentinel,   in   its
current   state   of   development,   would   not   work   and
should   not   be  deployed.    Delay   in   deployment   would
cost  this  company  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  .  .  .
I  am  not  authorized  to  divulge  the  name  of  this    con-
tractor  because  they  fear  reprisal  in  the  form  of  lost
contracts  on  other  projects."
—Cook   (Ky)    in   the   Senate   March   12,  one  of   the
four   GOP  Senate   freshman   against   the     ABM.
welfare  turn  out  to  be  eyewash.   But  we  have  shown   enough
to   enable   the   reader   to   understand    why   Eisenhower   and
Kennedy  declined  to  approve  the  ABM  and  why  every   science
adviser  of  Eisenhower,  Kennedy   and  Johnson  has  consistently
opposed   it.    It   must   be  defeated   or   it  will   set  off  a   major
new   spiral   in   the   arms   race   and    divert   to   the   military
and   the   arms   industry  not   only   the   money   but   the   tech-
nological   ingenuity  so  desperately  needed  at  home.   It  can  be
defeated  if  the  Senate  opposition   holds  firm  and  exposes  the
whole   imposture  as  the   Gore   subcommittee   of   Senate    For-
eign   Relations  has   begun   to   do.    The   leaders   of   the   fight
against  the  ABM,  Cooper  and  Fulbright,   Mansfield  and   Ken-
nedy,  must  call  halt  before  it  is    too  late.   The   peace   move-
ment   must   mobilize  as  never   before   to   counteract   the   con-
tractor   and   military   lobbyists  for   this   billion   dollar    boon-
doggle   now   swarming   into   almost   every   office   on    Capitol
Hill.   Not   the  least  of   the  matters  at  stake  is  the  future  of
our   best   youth.   How   end   alienation   from   democratic  proc-
esses  and  peaceful  change  when   they  see  a  President  opt   for
such   terrible  waste   against   near  unanimous   scientific   advice
and   in  the   face  of   social  needs  so  urgent  they  threaten    the
future  of  our  society?
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send  A  Free  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Stamped  Addressed   Envelope
FOR  STONE'S   NEW    BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A  Time of  Torment  (Random  House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)     Name
Street
City                                          Zip                  State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished   Q
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Name  .
Street
City                                           Zip                  State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
5618   Nebraska  Ave.,   N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C. 20015
3/2I/G9
I. F. Stones   Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,    D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I    F    Stone's    Weekly      Second   Chiss   Postage   Paid   ;it  Washington.  D.   C.     Published every  other  Monday  at  5618 Nebraska  Ave..  N.W.,  Washington.  D. C.
An   independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.   !•'.  Stone:   Circulation   Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  35  in  the  U.S.;   SG in   Canada;
S10  elsewhere.    Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Lurope:  S2U to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED