I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969oct06.pdf

============================================================

What  New  Asian Doctrine? Pps.  2-3
The  True  Meaning  of  Nixon's  "Vietnamization"  Policy
"What  I  was  told  and  what  I  saw   there  persuaded  me
that  'Vietnamization' is  in  fact  a  canopy  being  hoisted  to
shelter—perhaps   to   conceal—our   staying   in,  not   getting
out  ...      I  found  no  prominent  American  or  South  Viet-
namese,   who   thought   the   present   government  of   South
Vietnam  would  be  able  to  maintain  itself   even   in  two  or
three  years  if  our  armed  support  were   withdrawn."
—Rep.  Allard   Lowenstein  at  o  press  conference   Sept.  24
back  from  Saigon  to  launch  a  campaign  with  ADA,   SANE
and  ENOUGH   for  immediate    withdrawal.
/. R  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi-Weekfa                     *^
VOL  XVII,  NO.  18
OCTOBER  6,  1969
101
       WASHINGTON, D. C.
20  CENTS
Immediate  Withdrawal  Becoming A  Bandwagon
Whom   the   gods   would   destroy,   they   first   drive   inane.
At   press   conference   last   week   it   was   hard   to    distinguish
Nixon   from   Agnew.   He   implied   that  to  criticize  his   slow-
down   in  Southern   school   desegregation—15   years  after   the
Brown   decision—was   to  ask  for   "instant   integration"!   He
could  see  no  ethical  problem   in  replacing  Fortas,  the  judicial
moonlighter,   with   Haynsworth,   the   judiciary's   most   absent-
minded   stock   speculator.   He   said   there   were   no  American
combat   troops   in   Laos,   except   maybe   in   certain  activities
he  did  not  care  to  discuss.  He  denied   there  was  any  num-
bers   game   in   picturing   the   cancellation   of   50,000    draft
calls  for  November   and  December   as  a  sign  of   approaching
peace   in  Vietnam,  although   from   June   to   October   he   had
drafted    56,000   more   men   than   last   year   and   four   days
earlier   the   Pentagon   had   announced   as   an   economy   move
that  it  would   be  taking  70,300  fever   men   into  the  armed
services.   He   rejoiced   that   at   the   UN   he   had   found   "no
significant   criticism"   of   U.S.   policy   in   Vietnam;  the   Secret
Service  must  have  rushed  him  through   the  delegates'   lounge
pretty   fast.   He   is   against   the   Goodell   bill   to   remove   all
U.S.   troops   from   Vietnam   by   Dec.    1,   1970    because   he
wants  to  get  them  out  sooner,  but  it  is  better  not  to  let  the
enemy   know   because   that   would   destroy   his   incentive   to
negotiate.   All  we  need  to  bring   peace  he  said  is  a  "united
front"    at   home.   The   united   front   hasn't   been   advocated
so   openly   since   the    1937    convention    of   the   Communist
party.   As  for   the   student  moratorium   of   Oct.   15  and   the
other   anti-war  demonstrations   planned   for   this  fall,   Nixon
said    "under    no    circumstances"     would    he    "be     affected
whatever."   Before   making   that   remark,   he   should    have
phoned  that  man  down  on  the  ranch.
Even  That  College  in  South  Dakota
Either  the  wiretaps  at  1029  Vermont  Avenue  have  broken
down  or  Nixon  hasn't  caught  up  with  the  transcripts. That
has  suddenly   become  the  busiest   place   in  Washington.   On
the  tumultuous  eighth  floor,  with   17  telephones  and   11  out-
side    lines,    veterans   of    the    McCarthy    movement    led   by
David   Hawk  and  Sam  Brown,   are  swamped  by  the   response
to   the   Vietnam   moratorium,   a   campus   study-stoppage   for
peace  on   Oct.   15.  On   the  floor  above  the  more  politically
unkempt    but    equally    vigorous    New    Mobilization    Com-
mittee  to  End  the  War   in  Vietnam   is  having  trouble  coping
The  No.  1 Road-Block  To Peace
The  war  will  not  end  as  long  as  the  people  who  are
now  in  power in  Saigon  are  able  to  dominate our  policy.
—Walter   Lipjrman    to   the   AP   on   his   80th    birthday
High   government   officials,   recently   returned  from
Hanoi,  are  mildly  optimistic  about  the  possibilities  of
a    political   settlement—if   the    U.S.    makes    enough
concessions.   The  leaders  in  Hanoi,  these   officials   say,
are  resigned  to  the  prospect   of   a  separate   and  non-
Communist  South  Vietnam  for  at  least  the  next  decade
.  .  .  Nor  will  they  hold  out  for  a  political  settlement
that  would  guarantee  their  control  of  the  country  in  a
short  space  of  time.   The  Indian  observers  .  .  .   were
given  assurances,   they  say,   that  a  real  slackening  in
the  pace  of  fighting,  accompanied  by  serious  American
troop  withdrawals, would  be  matched  by  a  de-escalation
on  the   Communist  side.   Indian  officials,   however,  are
convinced  that  there  can  be  no  negotiated  end  to  the
war   as   long  as   the   present   regime   in  Saigon   stays
in power.
—Crosby  Noyes  from  New  Delhi:  Wash.  Star,  Sept.  25
with    public    response    to    its    Nov.     15    "March     Against
Death"  to  Washington   and  its  "No   Peace  for  Nixon"  drive,
aimed   to   make  his   public   appearances   uncomfortable   until
all   U.S.  troops  are  out  of  Vietnam.  The   best   index  of   the
response   is   that   even   the   bucolic   state   college    in   South
Dakota  where  Nixon   last  June  3  could  safely  attack  student
dissent  has  defected;   the   names   of   the  Vietnam   dead   will
be  read  there  on  Oct.   15  and  a  "tree  of  life"  planted.
When  Howard  Zinn   in  The   Nation   a  few  years  ago  first
proposed    immediate  and   unconditional  withdrawal,  he  was
a  political  leper.  Now  this  is  becoming  a  bandwagon.  When
Congressman   Allard  K.  Lowenstein,   the  founding  father  of
the  dump  Johnson   movement,   called   a  press  conference  last
week   to  demand   immediate  withdrawal,  he  was  flanked  by
spokesmen  for  organizations  as  sedately  respectable  as   ADA
and   SANE.   The   next   day   Senator   Goodell,    once   solidly
right-of-center,  called  a  press  conference  to  launch  S  3000,  to
cut   off   all   funds   for   U.S.   military   personnel   of   any   kind
in   Vietnam   after   Dec.    1,   1970.    Goodell    named    it    "the
Vietnam  Disengagement   Act."   It  is  his  bold  move  to  build  a
peace   and   left-of-center  constituency   for   re-election   in   the
face   of   Republican    New   York   Old   Guard   unwillingness
(Continued    on  Page   Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I. F. Stone's  Weekly,  Oct. 8,1969
The  China  Menace  Is  America's  Most  Costly  Hallucination  . . .
Carefully   examined,   there   is  no  new  Nixon  doctrine  for
Asia.  Nixon  is  still,  as he  was  in  the  50s,  an  Asia  Firster.  In
Senator  Mansfield's  report   (Sept.  22)   on  the  trip  he  made
to  Southeast   Asia  at  Nixon's   request   (Perspective   on   Asia:
The   New    US.    Doctrine   and   Southeast   Asia),   Mansfield
was  surprised  to  find  no  "sign  of  a  follow-through   to   the
new   doctrine   . '.   .   Some   U.   S.  missions   still   expect   this
Nation   to  continue  as  a  major  military  factor   in   Southeast
Asia   after  the  conclusion  of  the  war  in  Vietnam   ...      In
short   there   is   no   indication,  as  yet,  of   when   or   how   the
size  of   the   U.S.   presence   in   Asia  is  to   be  reduced   in  any
significant  degree."
The  Budget's  Biggest   Rathole
The  Mansfield  report  throws  fresh  light  on  the  magnitude
of   our   involvement.    It   says   that   in   addition   to   500,000
troops   in   Vietnam   and   50,000   in   Thailand,   we  have   "in
the   general   area   and   at   least   partially  connected   with   our
involvement    in    Southeast    Asia"    40,000   men    in    Japan,
45,000   in   Okinawa,    10,000   in   Taiwan,    60,000   in    the
Seventh   Fleet,   30,000   in   the   Philippines    and   additional
thousands  of  Guam—  "in  all  a  figure  approaching  800,000."
If   we  apply  the  rule  of  thumb  that  it  costs  about  $10,000
a  year  to  maintain  a  soldier  abroad  that  is  $8  billion  a  year.
This  understates   the  financial  commitments   because  it  omits
the  bases,  and  the  aid  we  give  out  to  pay  for  the  bases.   We
only   have   about   55,000   men   in   Korea,   for   example,   but
the   cost   of   our   Korean   involvement   is  about   $1   billion  a
year.  Asia  is  the  budget's   biggest   rathole.
Senator  Mansfield  is  a  humane  man.  He  is  always  hoping
that  he  can  coax,  flatter  and  educate  the  White   House  into
saner   policies   by   acting   as   courtier   and   counsellor   rather
than  critic.  This   was  his  approach   to  Johnson   and   now  to
Nixon.    He    is   pretending    that    on    Guam    Nixon    really
enunciated   a   new   policy  and   he   is  hoping   that   the   pre-
tense  can  be  made  a  reality.  But  all  Nixon   really   expressed
on   Guam   is   that   same   hope   which   led   Dulles   to   form
SEATO,   the  hope  that  somehow  we  could  build   a  ring  of
hostile    states   around    China    on    the    cheap,    with    these
peripheral    Asian   regimes   supplying   the   manpower   while
The Imperial  Shadow Is  Not  China But  Ours
".  .  .  the  independence   of  Asian  countries  would  be
hollow  indeed  if  it   involved  merely   an  exchange  of  a
past   colonial   status   for   the   indefinite   prop   of     U.S.
support  ...      we  have  acted  on  the  scale  we  have  in
Southeast    Asia    largely    to    support    small    nations
against   what   has   been   calculated    as   the   threat   of
Communist   aggression—notably     from   China.   In  fact,
there  was  little  expression  of  fear  in  any  of  the  coun-
tries  visited  of  an  attack  or  invasion   from  China.  .  .  .
It   seems   to   me   that   our   presumption   of   a   primary
danger   to  the  Southeast  Asian   countries,   which   they
themselves   do  not  perceive,   does  not   provide  a  sound
basis  for  U.S.  policy.  Rather,  it  tends  to  create  for  this
Nation  the  role  of  selfappointed,   great  power  protector
in  an  area  in which a  militant  young  nationalism  speaks
the  common  language  of  resistance  to  foreign   intrusian
.  .  .  The  age  in  which  foreign  military   dominance   of
any  Asian   people  was  a  practical   possibility   has  long
since   ended."
—Senator  Mansfield's   report   on  the  Southeast  Asian
tour  he  made  at  Nixon's  request.
we  supplied  arms  and  aid.   This  is  where  Vietnam  began.
A  new  policy  has  to  be  clear   and   forceful   to  be  imple-
mented.   If   it   is  announced,   as  Nixon   did,  in-a   "not-for-
direct-quotation"    press    conference,    it   must   remain    fuzzy.
There  is  no  official   record  of  what  he  said—surely  a  curious
way   to   launch   a  new   policy.   The   nearest   thing   to   a   full
paraphrase  was  published   in  the  New   York   Times   July  26.
Here  one  may  find  the  real  sources  of  Nixon's  unwillingness
to  be  pinned  down  on  just  what  his  new  policy  is.  It   rests
on  two  old  delusions.
The  first  is  in  Nixon's  notion  of  how  to  avoid  new  Viet-
nams.  As  the  Times   account  put  it,  "he   (the  President)   is
convinced  that  the  way  to   avoid   becoming   involved   in   an-
other  war   in  Asia  is  for   the   United   States   to  continue  to
play  a  significant  role"  in  Asia.  You  get  out  by  staying  in.
The   second   lies  in  his  view  that  the  main  danger  to   world
peace   is   in   China.  Three   times  he   stressed   its   "growing
power",  "its  very  aggressive  .  .  .  and  belligerent   attitude."
Mansfield's  most  important  discovery  was  that  "there  was
little  expression   of   fear  in   any  of   the   countries  visited  of
Hartke  Marshals  23 Votes  Against  A  $25 Billion  Naval  Boondoggle
The  Senate   voted  last   week  to  begin   production  of   the
Navy's   F-14  "fighter,"  which  Sen.   Hartke  calculates  will
cost   at   least   $25   billion   by   1980.  Actually,  Hartke  said,
it  is  not  a  fighter  at  all  but  a  slimmed-down, more  costly
version  of  the  Navy  TFX  missile  aircraft.   It  looks  like  one
of   the  great   aerospace   boondoggles   of   all  time,  dwarfing
the   TFX   and   the   C-5A,  and   maybe   even   the   Safeguard
ABM.  The  Navy  estimates   the  F-14  program  will  amount
to   1,200   aircraft   at   a   cost   of   nearly   $10   million   each.
Operating  costs  will  double  this  price  over  ten   years.
Hartke  uncovered  a  lot  of   Pentagon   documents  backing
his   case  that  the   F-14  is   a  bad  aircraft.  But  the   papers
all   had  security  classifications  which  prevented   him   from
putting  them  into  the  Congressional   Record.  He  found  that
Navy   pilots  denounce   the   new   plane   as   too  clumsy  and
slow,  and  that   the  Pentagon's   Office   of   Systems   Analysis
has  shown  how  a  better  fighter  can  be  built  for  one-third
the  cost.  That  would  mean  abandoning  the  heavy   Phoenix
missile,  which  the   Navy   says   is   required  to   shoot   down
Soviet   bombers.   But   last   year   the   Senate    Preparadness
Investigating  Subcommittee  found  the  Soviet  bomber  threat
to  our  fleet  almost  nonexistent.   Hartke  uncovered   the  fact
that  the   Phoenix  will  cost   $400,000  apiece.   There   will  be
six  to  an  aircraft.  Outfitting  the  new  Navy  fighters   with
it    will    cost    anywhere   from    $2   billion   to    $10   billion,
additional.
Hartke's    amendment    to    require    the    Senate     Armed
Services   Committee  to  take  a  new   look   at   the   F-14   was
killed  on  a  63  to  23  vote.   Sen.   Cannon  scornfully  said  his
Tactical   Airpower  Subcommittee   had   already   studied   the
aircraft.   None  of   the   Senators   fighting   military  spending
rose  to  the  occasion   when  Cannon  then  confessed   that  he
had  not  see   any  of   the  critical  studies  of   the   F-14  listed
by  Hartke  in  the  Sept.   5  Congressional    Record.  But  Can-
non's   admission   highlighted,   as   much  as   anything   in   the
debate   on   the   defense    budget,   what   a   shallow   examina-
tion   the   Armed   Services    Committees    give    most    major
Pentagon   requests.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  Oct.  6,1969
. . . China's Entire GNP  Does  Not  Equal the Pentagon's  Budget
an   attack   or   invasion    from   China."   He   added   softly,    "It
seems  to  me  that  our  presumption   of  a  primary  danger   to
the  Southeast   Asia  countries,   which   they  themselves   do  not
perceive,  does  not  provide  a  sound  basis  for  U.S.  policy."
The  China   menace  painted   by  Nixon   at  Guam  is  the  old
bogey   of   China   Firsters   like   Knowland   in   the   50s.   It   is
useful  to  turn  from  the  Mansfield  report  to  the  latest  annual
survey   of    the   world    military   balance    published    by   the
Institute   for   Strategic   Studies   in   London   which   has   just
arrived   here.  There  are,   first   of   all,   two  ways  to   estimate
the  Gross  National  Product   of  China.  In  terms  of  the  yuan
it  has  been  figured  at  $48  billion  and  in  terms  of  equivalent
dollar  purchasing   power  at  $78  billion.   Either  way,  China's
entire   production   of   goods   and   services,   civilian  and  mili-
tary,  does  not  equal  the  $80  billion  a  year  we  spend  on  the
military   alone.
Not  Really  A  Great   Power
China  has  space  and  manpower;  it  may  easily  be  defeated
but  it  is  almost   impossible   to  occupy   and  conquer.  It  is  an
optical   illusion   to   consider   it   a  great   power   in   any   other
sense.   Even   in   the   number   of   men   under   arms,   it   ranks
third   (with   2.8  million)   after   the  U.S.   (3.4   million)   and
the  Soviet  Union   (  3.3  million.)   We  have  almost  9  percent
of  our  manpower  under  arms,  China  has  less  than  2  percent.
China  cannot  supply  a  bigger  army.  Though  there  are  150
million  Chinese  of  military  age,  the  Institute  says  the  Chinese
arms  industry  "could  not  supply  more  than   a  small  part  of
this   manpower   with   modern   weapons,   even   small   arms."
It  "would  be  in  no  position   to  produce  weapons  on  a  scale
needed    for   war"    and   it   adds,    "neither    could    Chinese-
produced   nuclear  arms  be  a  substitute  for  them."  The   latest
official    U.S.   estimates   claim   we   can   deliver   4200   atomic
warheads  and  the  Russians  1200.  The   Chinese,  the  Institute
reports,  may  have  "stocks  of  fissile  material"   which  "might
be  sufficient"   for  about  100  atomic  bombs  of  the  Hiroshima
"baby"   size  and  perhaps   a  few  large  megaton  fission-fusion
bombs.   Even   this   may   be   overestimating   China's  capacity
since   "the   lengthening   gap"   between   China's   nuclear   tests
How  The  Pentagon Shuts  Out The  Watchdog
General   Accounting   Office  has  told  Congress  that   it
cannot   fulfill   an  assignment   to   scrutinize   and   report
continuously    on   the   Safeguard    anti-ballistic   missile
(ABM)   program  because  the  Defense   Department  has
blocked  access  to  key  documents.   According  to  Comp-
troller   General   Elmer   B.  Staats,   GAO  is   being   per-
mitted   to   see   only   final   documents   approved   by   Lt.
Gen.   Alfred   D.   Starbird,   the   system    manager.   "We
are   precluded   from  seeing   .  .  .   (hiatus   in   original)
any   documents    at   variance   with   a    final    decision,"
Staats  said.  Staats  testified  before  the  Senate  Govern-
ment    Operations    executive    reorganization     subcom-
mittee,   headed   by   Sen.   Kibicoff   (D.   Conn).  The   sub-
committee    is   considering    expansion   of   GAO  and  an
increase  in  its  investigative  power.
—Aviation   Week   &  Space    Technology,    September   22
may  mean  that  fissile  material   "is  not  being  produced  in  the
quantities  originally  forecast  in  the  West."
Atom  bombs  cannot  be  sent  by  parcel  post.  China  is  even
weaker  in  means  of  delivery.  A  chart  in  the  Institute  report
shows   the   delivery  capacity   of   the   five   nuclear   powers   in
five  categories:   land-based  ICBMs,   sea-based   missiles,   long
range   bombers,   medium   range   missiles   and   bombers,   and
medium    bombers.    All   China   has   are   "a    few"   medium
bombers,   copies   of   our   old   B-29s.   Its   missile  program   is
lagging.   There  are  no  signs  of  preparations  "for  deploying
medium  range  missiles"  nor  of  preparations  for  the  oceanic
testing  ICBMs  require.
Several   times   in   the   past   decade   China   offered    us   an
"atom  free  Pacific"  pact.  Some  day  we  may  be  sorry  we  did
not   accept.   Now   this  pitifully   small  atomic  program   is  the
excuse   for   a  huge   deployment  of   American  nuclear   power
in  the  Pacific,  the  atomic  umbrella  Nixon  promised  at  Guam
to  maintain.  Until  we  dissipate  the  China  bogey,   and  give
up   the   idea   of   playing   policeman   and   nursemaid  to   the
shrewd  but   corrupt  oligarchies  on  China's  borders,  we  will
have    more    Vietnams    and    maybe   worse.    America's    only-
course  of   safety  and  sanity  is  to  get  out  of   Asia  altogether.
Nixon  wants  to  stay  in.
Putting  The  Spotlight  on  The  Biggest  Obstacle  to  Tax  Reform  In  The  Senate
Nixon's   reversal   of   his   Treasury   Secretary   on  oil   de-
pletion   allowances   is   in   character.    Less   obvious   an  ob-
stacle   to   this   and   other    tax    reforms    is    the   Senate
Finance    Committee.   Johnson    and   Kerr   packed   it    long
ago  with  Senators  on  whom  they   could  count  to  vote   for
oil    depletion    and    other    tax    loopholes    for    the    upper
brackets.    A    survey    by    Congressional     Quarterly   which
few  papers  will  print  shows  this  is  where  pressure   has  to
be  brought   if  there  is   to  be  tax   reform.  Of  the   17  mem-
bers  a  majority   has  voted   for  depletion  allowances.    Only
three   members  voted  against   them   in  1964  the  last   time
a   vote   was   taken.   They   were   Kibicoff    (D.   Conn),  Gore
(D.  Tenn)  and  Williams   (R.  Del).
Among   the   liberals  on  the   Committee  who  have   voted
for  oil  depletion  allowances—and   other  tax   favors  for  the
rich—are  Fulbright   (D.  Ark),  Hartke  (D.  Ind), McCarthy
(D.   Minn).   Another   liberal   member,   Harris   (D.   Okla),
has   sponsored   tax   reform   but   opposes   any   reduction   in
oil   depletion   allowances.   A   Fulbright   aide   told   CQ's  Leg
Gapay   that   this   year   Fulbright   was   considering    Prox-
mire's   proposal   for   a   graduated   depletion   schedule,    cut-
ting   the   allowance   for   big   producers.   Kibicoff   has   intro-
duced   a   sweeping   tax   reform  bill  despite   the   power  of
insurance  and  aircraft   companies  in  Connecticut.
McCarthy   and  Hartke,  among  the  liberals  on  the  Com-
mittee,   have   the   worst    records    for    sponsoring    special
interest    tax   legislation.   A   Wall   Street    securities  firm,
Brimberg   &  Company,  provided  the   largest   single   source
of   lecture   funds   for   Senators   last   year,   with   McCarthy
($5,000)   and  Hartke  ($2,500)   getting   the  largest   fees.
The  chairman  of   the   Finance  committee,  Russell  Long,
son  of   Huey,  likes  to   pose   as   a  Populist   but   is   a  pillar
of   the  oil   and  gas   industry.  Other   members  are  wealthy
men  with  business  interests  their  tax  votes  protect.   Among
them  are  Jordan  (R  Idaho),  Fannin   (R.  Ariz),   Anderson
(D.N.M.),   Byrd   (D.   Va.),  Talmadge   (D.   Ga),  and   Ben-
nett   (R.  Utah).  Miller   (R.  Iowa)   is  a  former  tax  lawyer.
Curtis   (R.  Neb)   is   another   lawyer  who  opposes   tax   re-
form.   Hansen   (R.   Wyo)   the   newest   member,  is   for   de-
pletion  allowances.   The  greatest   friend   on  the  committee
for   those   seeking   tax   favors   was   Dirksen,   perhaps   the
biggest  phony  ever  to  sit  in  the  U.S.  Senate.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,   Oct.  6,  1969
There  May Be  A  Moratorium  In
(Continued   from  Page   One)
even  to  renominate  him.  The  bill  brought  an  anguished  cry
from  Rockefeller,  who  appointed   Goodell   to  the  Senate  last
year  and  wishes  he  hadn't.   The  Goodell  bill  gives  the  peace
movement  a  focus  and  a  target   date.  It  also  raises  the  ante
for  former Justice  Goldberg,  Goodell's  most  probable   oppon-
ent,   who   will   have   to   be   explicit   to   match   S.3000.
Strange  Parliamentary  Maneuver
Morse   and   Gruening   would   hardly   recognize   the   Senate
these  days.  Four   Senators,   Goodell,  Hatfield,  McCarthy  and
McGovern,   have  already  endorsed   the   Oct.   15  Moratorium.
Senator   Harris,   the   chairman   of   the   Democratic   National
Committee,  met  with  11  other  Senators  and   12  Congressmen
to  extend  the  moratorium  into  the  halls  of  Congress.   There
is  talk  of  a  movement  to  stay  away  that  day  and  deny  both
houses   a  quorum.   Senator   Fulbright   has  promised   hearings
on  the  Goodell  bill;  these  should  provide  a  continuous anti-
war  forum.  The  most  striking evidence  of  the  rising  rebellion
came  when  Senator  Cooper  offered  an  amendment  to  the  $20
billion   military  authorization  bill   to   forbid   any   funds   for
U.S.   combat  troops   in   Laos   or   Thailand.    This   threw   the
Pentagon   into  a  dither.  Normally  the  bill  would  easily  have
been   voted  down   but   Stennis  was   so  afraid   of   a   vote   he
decided   to   sweet-talk  it   instead.   He   said   he   approved   its
purpose  but  sought   to  de-fang  the  bill  by  interpreting  it  as
applicable  only  to  funds  available  in  the  $2.5  billion  military
aid   bill.   He    then    voted    for   it,   precipitating  unanimous
approval,  86  to  0.  This  was  the  first  time  in  history  that  the
Congress,  Too,   On  October 15
Look  What  Thieu Wants  Now
Mr.   SCALI:   If   the   U.S.    leaves   behind   Air   Force
units,   artillery    and   logistics   support,   do   you    think
that  by  the  end  of   1970  your  ground  forces  would  be
able  to  withstand  whatever  enemy  pressure  remains?
President  THIEU:  No.  1970  is  not  enough  .  .  .
Mr.  SCALI:  Do  you  expect  that  President  Nixon  will
announce   a    third    withdrawal     of    American   troops
some  time  after  December  15?
President   THIEU:   We   have   agreed   that   at   any
time   we   would   like   to  replace   more   U.S.   troops,   we
have  to  discuss  it  together.  President   Nixon  has  not
yet   told   me   about   the   next   for   1970,    and   we   are
waiting  for  a  new  plan  for  that.
Mr.  SCALI:  The  President  has  not  given  you  even
a  tentative  timetable  .  .  .?
President  THIEU:  No, not  yet,   up  to  now .  .  . The
problem   is  not  to  stick   (sic)   and  run  but  to  help  this
small  country  to  grow  up  and  to  be  strong  ...      so
that   the   U.S.   can  be  free   and  stay   behind  and  help
us   economically   and   in   more   sophisticated   weapons,
like  atomic  warfare  that  we  have   not.
Mr.   REYNOLDS:   More  sophisticated   weapons  like
what?
President  THIEU:  Like  atomic  weapons.
—ABC's  Issues  and Answers, Sept. 28.
leadership   could   only   block   a   measure   by   marshalling   a
unanimous  vote  for   it,  albeit  trickily  reinterpreted.   But   the
maneuver,  even   if   effective,   leaves   the   door   wide  open   to
a  less  ambiguous  amendment  when  the  military appropriation
bill  reaches  the  Senate.
OWNKKSHIP,  MANAtiKMKNT AM>  CIRCl'LATIOX
(Act  of  October   23.  1962:   Section   4369.  Title  39.  United   States   Code)
1.  Date  of   Filing  Sept.  21,   1969.
2.  Title  of   Publication:   I.   I-'.  Stone's   Weekly,
3.  Frequency  of  issue:   Every  other  week;   not  published  in  August.
4.  Location   of   known   office   of  publication:   4420  29th   St..    N.W..    Wash-
inirton.  I).  C.   iOOOS.
5.  Location  of   the  headquarters  or   general   business  offices  of   the   pub-
lishers:   4420  29th  St..   N.W.,   Washington.  II.  C.  20008.
6.  Names  anil  addresses  of  publisher,   editor,  and  managing  editor:  I.  F.
Stone,  same  address.
7.  Owner   (('/   owned   by  a   ;)arfH<v*/u>  or  other  unincorporated   firm,   its
name   and   addrrxx,    at    irell   a*   that   '<f  farh    individual   must   be    ffivent:
I.   F.   Stone.   4120  29th   St..    N.W..    Washington.   D.  C.   20008:   Esther  M.
Stone,  same  address.
8.  Known  bondholders,  mortgagees,  and  other  security  holders  owning  or
holding   1  percent  or   more  of  total   amount   of  bonds,  mortgages  or  other
securities   (If   there   are   none,   so  state):   none.
9.  Paragraphs   7  and   8  include,  in  cases  where   the  stockholder  or_secur-
•  ity   holder  appears   upon   the   books   of   the   company   as   trustee   or   in    any
other  fiduciary  relation,   the  name  of  the  person  or  corporation  for   whom
such  trustee  is  acting,  also  the  statements  in  the  two  paragraphs  show  the
affiant's   full   knowledge   and   belief   as   10  the  circumstances  and   conditions
under  which   stockholders  and  security  holders  who  do  not  appear  upon  the
books  of  the  company  as  trustees,  hold   stock  and  securities  in  a  capacity
other  than  that  of  a  bonande  owner.
Average  No.   Copies
Each  Issue  During   Single Issue Nearest
Preceeding 12 months        To Filing Date
A.  Total  No.   Copies   Printed                          47,500
it.  Paid   Circulation
1.  Sates  Through  Agents,  News
Dealers   or  Otherwise                         2,984
2. To  Term  Subscribers  by
Mail,  Carriers  Delivery,  or  by
other  means                                       43,760
C.  Total   Paid   Circulation                              46,744
D.  Free  Distribution   (including
samples)    by  Mail.  Carrier  De-
livery,   or   by   Other   Means                  200
E.   Total   No.   of   Copies   Distributed          46,944
F.  Office    Use,    Etc.                                              506
G.  Total                                                                47,500
52,000
3,102
47.996
61,098
300
51.398
602
52,000
FOR   STONE'S    NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name
Street
City                                          Zip                 State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished   n
Please   renew   (or   enter)   a   sub  for   the  enclosed   $5:
Name
Street
City                                            Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                    io/e/69
1420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
I   certify  that  the   statements   made   by   me   above   are   correct   and   com-
plete.  I.  F.  Stone,   editor.
/  E  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published   Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,   N. W.
Washington,   D. C.  20008
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
i".  Stone's  Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,  D.C.   Published   every  other  Monday  except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St..  N.W.,   Washington.   D.C.
A»t   independent   l>i-we«'My  published  jmd  edited  by  1.  F.  Stone;  Circulation   Manager.   Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $j   in  the  U.S.:   $6  in   Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  S20 to  Israel,  Asia  and   Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED