I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969may19.pdf

============================================================

Why  Fortas Should  Resign, P.  2
The  Essential  Truth  No  Repression  Can  Erase
"A   society   that   does   not   correct   its   own  ills   cannot
expect  peace  .  .  .  The frustrations  spawned  by a  society
which  has  inverted   its  values  and  reversed   its  priorities,
putting   war   ahead   of   human  well-being  and   preferring
privilege   to   justice—these   frustrations    pushed   the   on-
coming   college   generation   into   an   activism   which   over-
reaches  immediately  attainable  goals."
—Dr.    Buell  Gallagher  May   7  and  May   9,  resigning   as
president  of  Neiv  York's  City  College.
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
/V/xi-MJ   A/f//»/•*r/r*?/7     J-?-»_ \\//>/}hi\\                                   ^^
Now  Published  Bi-  Weekly
VOL.   XVII,  NO.  10
MAY   19, 1969
101
       WASHINGTON, D. C.20  CENTS
In  Defense  of the  Campus  Rebels
I  hate  to  -write  on  subjects  about  which  I  know  no  more
than  the  conventional  wisdom  of  the  moment.   One  of  these
subjects  is  the  campus revolt.   My  credentials as  an  expert  are
slim.   I   always  loved   learning  and  hated   school.    I  wanted
to  go  to  Harvard,  but  I  couldn't  get  in  because  I  had  gradu-
ated  49th  in  a  class  of  52  from  a  small-town  high  school.   I
went  to  college  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  which  was
obligated—this  sounds like an  echo  of  a familiar  black demand
today  —   to  take  graduates  of   high   schools   in   neighboring
communities  no  matter  how  ill-fitted.   My  boyhood  idol  was
the  saintly  anarchist  Kropotkin.    I  looked   down  on   college
degrees  and  felt  that  a  man  should  -do only  what  was  sincere
and   true   and   without   thought   of   mundane   advancement.
This  provided  lofty  reasons  for  not  doing  homework.   I  ma-
jored  in  philosophy   with  the  vague  thought   of   teaching  it
but  though  I  revered  two  of  my  professors   I  disliked   the
smell  of  a  college   faculty.   I  dropped   out  in  my  third  year
to  go  back  to  newspaper  work.   Those  were  the  twenties  and
I  was  a  pre-depression   radical.   So  I  might  be  described   I
suppose  as  a  premature   New   Leftist,   though   I   never   had
the  urge  to  bum  anything  down.
If  National  Security  Comes First
In  microcosm,  the  Weekly   and  I  have  become   typical  of
our  society.  The  war  and  the  military have  taken  up  so  much
of  our  energies  that  we  have  neglected  the  blacks,  the  poor
and  students.  Seen  from  afar,  the  turmoil   and  the  deepening
division   appear   to  be  a  familiar  tragedy,   like  watching   a
friend  drink  himself  to  death.   Everybody knows  what  needs
to  be  done,  but  the  will  is  lacking.   We  have  to  break   the
habit.   There  is  no  excuse  for  poverty  in  a  society  which  can
spend  $80   billion  a  year  on   its  war  machine.    If   national
security   comes  first,  as  the  spokesmen   for  the  Pentagon   tell
us,  then  we  can  only  reply   that  the  clearest  danger  to  the
national   security  lies  in  the  rising  revolt  of  our  black  popu-
lation.   Our  own  country  is  becoming   a  Vietnam.    As  if  in
retribution   for  the   suffering   we  have   imposed,   we  are con-
fronted   by  the  same  choices:  either  to  satisfy  the   aspirations
of  the  oppressed  or  to  try  and   crush   them   by  force.    The
former   would   be  costly,   but  the   latter   will   be  disastrous.
This  is  what  the  campus  rebels  are  trying  to  tell  us,  in
the only  way which  seems to  get attention.  I do  not  like  much
of  what   they  are  saying  and  doing.   I  do  not  like  to  hear
opponents  shouted  down,  much  less  beaten  up.   I  do  not  like
Add  Voices Of  Reason
"  'We  need  more  chancellors  and  mayors  who  de-
light  in  battle,'   [Eric  Hotter]  shouted,  thumping  his
fist  on  the  witness  table,  'who love  a  fight,  who  get
up  in the morning and say: "Who  shall I kill today?"  '"
—Testifying     in   Washington   on   campus   disorders,
New York  Times, May  10.
"If   people  demonstrated  in  a   manner   to   interfere
with  others,  they  should  be  rounded  up  and  put  in  a
detention   camp."
—Dep.  Atty.  Gen. Richard  Kleindienst,   Goldwater's
right-hand   man   in  1964, quoted  in   a  revealing   and
comprehensive  portrait  of  Nixon's   Justice   Department
by  Elizabeth   Drew  in  the  May  Atlantic  Monthly.
"Is  there  a  legitimate  interest  in  favor of our modern
ideological  criminal  in  today's  world  that  is  deserving
of  protection?"
—Kleindienst  speech  at  the  Pentagon  May  1.
"The  time  has  come  for  an  end  to  patience."
—Atty.  Gen.  Mitchell's  Law  Day  speech,  May  1.
to  hear  any  one  group  or  class,  including  policemen,  called
pigs.   I  do  not  think  four  letter  words  are  arguments.   I  hate
hate,   intolerance  and   violence.    I  see  them   as  man's   most
ancient  and  enduring  enemies  and  I  hate  to  see  them  welling
up  on  my  side.   But  I  feel  about  the  rebels  as  Erasmus  did
about  Luther.   Erasmus  helped   inspire   the  Reformation  but
was  repelled   by  the  man  who  brought  it  to  fruition.   He  saw
that  Luther  was  as  intolerant  and  as  dogmatic  as  the   Church.
"From  argument,"  as Erasmus  saw it,  "there would  be a  quick
resort   to  the  sword,  and  the  whole  world  would  be  full  of
fury  and  madness."   Two  centuries  of  religious  wars  without
parallel  for  blood-lust  were  soon  to  prove  how  right  were  his
misgivings.   But  while  Erasmus  "could  not  join  Luther,   he
dared  not  oppose  him, lest  haply,  as  he  confessed   'he  might
be  fighting  against  the  spirit  of  God.' "*  I  feel  that  the  New
Left  and  the  black  revolutionists,   like  Luther,  are  doing  God's
work,  too, in   refusing   any  longer   to   submit   to   evil,   and
challenging  society  to  reform  or  crush  them.
Lifelong   dissent  has  more  than   acclimated   me  cheerfully
to  defeat.    It  has  made  me  suspicious  of  victory.   I  feel  un-
easy  at  the  very  idea- of  a  Movement.   I  see  every  insight
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
*  Fronde's Life  and Letters of  Erasmus.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,  May   Iff,  1969
Nixon's   45  Minutes  For  the  Poor;  The  Hidden  Truth  About  the  Pueblo  Affair
Fortas  Has Disgraced  the  Court  and  the  Liberal  Tradition
ANY   INQUIRY  INTO  THE  FORTAS   AFFAIR  might  begin   by
asking  why  the  $20,000  check  given  the  Justice  in January,
1966,  by the  Wolf son  Family Foundation  turned  up  in  its  tax
return  marked  "exchange"  and  was  listed  as an  asset. William
Lambert  who  uncovered  the  transaction  for   LIFE  says  one
accountant  declared  "it  appeared  to  be  a prepayment for  serv-
ice  expected  to  be rendered."   If  the  service Wolfson  expected
was  that  he  would  escape  prosecution  in  the  Continental  En-
terprises  and   Merrirt-Chapman  cases,  that  hope   was  disap-
pointed.    In  September  and  October  Wolfson   was  indicted.
In  December   Fortas  repaid  the  $20,000.    A  second  line  of
inquiry might  begin  with  Fortas'  failure,  in  his  letter  to LIFE,
to  mention  the  $20,000  payment  at  all.   Apparently  he  did
not  know  Lambert  had  turned  up  the  check.  LIFE  had  asked
for  a  meeting  in  which  Fortas  could  explain  any information
it  had  gathered.   Fortas  declined,  and  sent  the  letter  instead.
The  letter  purported   to  be  a  full  account  of  his  relationship
'with  Wolfson  but  did  not  mention  the  $20,000.    Fortas  was
one  of  the  smartest .lawyers  in  the  business.   He  knew  Wolf-
son.   Wolfson  was  a  slick  operator.   He  looted  Washington's
transit  system when  it  was under his  control.  He  was convicted
for   making  $3.5   million   in  Continental  Enterprises  at   the
expense  of  its  stockholders  and  $4  million  at  the  expense  of
Merritt-Chapman's.  How  could  Fortas  take a  fee  while  on  the
Supreme   Court   and   take  it   from  a  notorious   manipulator
fighting   off   an  SEC  prosecution  by  name-dropping  about  his
political  influence ?  All  that  cant  about  taking  it  to  advise  the
Wolfson   Foundation   about  civil  rights  only  makes  it  stink
higher  —  a  rich  judge  takes  $20,000  to  help  poor  Nigras!
Fortas should  step  down.
THE   NKON   ADMINISTRATION,   AS  WE   WENT   TO   PRESS
May  12,  was  giving  a  prime  lesson  on  how  not  to   prevent
demonstrations.    The  White  House  was  granting   the  Poor
Peoples  Campaign  45  minutes  with  the  President   and  mem-
bers  of  his  Cabinet  on their  10 new  demands.  These  represent
a  serious  program  to  end  poverty  in  America.   They  range
from  guaranteed   annual  incomes  and  a  national  health   pro-
.gram  for  the  poor  to an  end  of  the  Vietnam war  and  abandon-
ment   of   the   ABM.   They   ask  an   immediate   appropriation
of   $2.5   billion   against   hunger   and   for   free   food   stamps
for   all  with  incomes  of  less  than  $3,000.   The  Rev.  Ralph
David   Abernathy   has   been   trying   for   months   to   set   up
serious  meetings  with  various  Cabinet  and  other  officials  who
would  be involved,  but  they refused  to  meet  individually.   One
would  think  they  would  appreciate  a  chance  to  discuss  these
matters  seriously.   A 45 minute visit  at the  White  House  is no
As  Trigger-Happy  As  The  North  Koreans
"Dear  Sir—Let  me  add  a  footnote  to  your  comment
on  our  Visual   Identification   Zone*   and  the  shooting
down  of  our  spy  plane  by  North  Korea.   In  the  living
room  of  the  Grenfell  Mission  at  Cartwright,  Labrador,
a  Canadian  mail  pilot,  who  confessed  to  having   diffi-
culty  in  remembering  to  file  his  flight  plan,  recounted
how   he  had  been  overhauled   and  challenged   by   two
U.S.  interceptors.  It  was  something  of  a  joke  to him,
but  two  young officers  from  the  nearby  U.S.  Radar Site
picked  him  up  on  it,  warning  him  to  be  very  careful
not  to  repeat  his  omission.   'Those  interceptor  pilots
can be  pretty trigger-happy when  you  yank  them  away
from  their  card  game  to  go  out  after  some  stray  flier
on  a  dark  night'  was  essentially the  way  they  put  it—
and  this  was  a  Canadian  pilot  flying  Canadian  skies!
"This   was  just  the   'barrack   room'  repartee  of   a
couple  of   our  temporary   grounded  pilots,  but  at   the
float  where  mail  pilots  landed  and  took  off  was  posted
this  notice,  signed  by  the   commanding   officer   of   the
radar  site:   'Be  sure  to   file   your   flight   plan   before
taking  off.  It  may  save  your  life.'"
—Chas.  T.  Jackson,  Hewlett,  L.I.,   N.Y.
*  Planes   approaching  the  U.S.  must  identify  them-
selves  2  hours  out.   Mr.  Jackson  was  principal  at  the
Grenfell  Mission  school  in  Labrador  in   1956-58.
substitute,  and  can be  little  more than  a polite  brushoff.   If  the
result   is  demonstrations   in   the   streets  and   an  addition  to
public  turbulence,  the  fault  will  lie  with  the Administration.
IT  is  A  PITY  IN  A WAY that  the  Pueblo  crew  was  not  sub-
jected  to  court  martial  so  the  country  could  see  how  stupid
and  heartless  the  high  brass  can  be.   We  hope  Congress  will
push  its  own  inquiry.   The  biggest  story  buried  in  the  secret
records  of  the  Pueblo  affair  is that  from  an  intelligence  point
of  view  the  trip  was  a  complete  blank.   This  is  well  known
to  insiders,   and   carries  grave   implications   for   the   future.
What   if   the  commander   of  the   next   spy  ship   decides  to
fight  rather  than  give  up  his  ship?   Are  we  to  be  drawn  into
a  full   scale  war  next  time  because   of   an  intelligence  mis-
carriage?
THE   MURKY  NEWS  OUT  OF  THE  PARIS  NEGOTIATIONS  will
become  clearer  if  one  keeps  in  mind  that  what  we  mean  by
an  "honorable"  peace  is  the  imposition  on  South  Vietnam  of
a  right-wing  military  regime  like  that  in  South  Korea,  where
all  the  legal  parties  are  right  of  center,  and  a  General   rules
in  the  guise  of  President.
North  Dakota's  Governor  And A  Radiologist  Provide  Fresh  Perspectives   On  The ABM
"Our   nation   is   swept   along   by  contrived   hysteria   to
keep  the  pipeline  of  the  defense  industries  full."
—Gov.  Wm.  L.   Guy   of  North  Dakota,  one  of   the   two
states  slated  for  initial  deployment   of  the  ABM, in  a  letter
of   April  16  to  Chairman  Stennis  of  Senate  Armed  Serv-
ices,   declaring   that   "priority    needs   such   as   education,
health  services  and  reclamation  projects  .  .  .  would  be
far  better  for  this state's  economy  than  the  ABM  system."
"The  long-range   biological  effects  of  fallout   appear  to
be  some  10  to  100  times  more  serious  than  anticipated  so
that  regardless   of  whether  or  not  defensive   missiles   are
deployed,  any  kind  of  full  scale  unclear  war  now  for  the
first   time   threatens   the   extinction   of   mankind  through
the  death  of  the  children  born  to  the   survivors.
"The  long-range  world-wide fallout  from  a  massive  first
strike   supposedly   threatened   by   the   Russian [s]    would
necessarily   be  so   large   that   it   would   end  the   Russian
society    through   its    effect    on   their   newborn  children.
This  would  be  true  even  if  not  a  single  one  of  our  thou-
sands   of   bombs  should  reach   Russian   soil.     [Emphasis
added—IPS]
"All  attempts  to  provide  a  defense  can  only  lead  to  an
increase   in   the   total   amount   of   weapons   required   to
overcome  [it]   and would  increase  the  long-range biological
effects  produced  by  a  nuclear  war,  leading  to  the  end  of
man  through  fetal  or  infant  deaths  in  the  next  genera-
tion."
—Dr. Ernest  J.  Sternglass,  U. of  Pittsburgh,  to  Bingham
(D-N.Y.J    (abr.),   in   Cong.  Rec.  April   24  with   a  related
article  in  the  April   Bulletin   of  the  Atomic  Scientists.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May 19,1969
Why  The   American  Friends  Service   Committee  Calls  For  Immediate  U.S.  Withdrawal
An Eloquent White Paper On the Horror of What We Are Doing in Vietnam
We  present  here  in  abridged  form  the  White  Paper  which
the  American  Friends  Service  Committee  has  just  issued  on
the  war   in   Vietnam.    It   is   the  most  eloquent  plea  of   its
kind  we  have  seen.   It   was  signed   by  Gilbert  F.  White  as
chairman  and  Branson  P.  Clark  aa executive  secretary.   The
full   text   and  its   documentation  may   be  obtained  from   the
AFSC  in  Philadelphia  or  in  the  May  7  Congressional Record
where  it   was  inserted  by  Ryan   (D.-N.Y.).
It  has  been  mote  than  a  year  since  the  rhetoric  of   peace
began  in  Vietnam.  During  this  time  scores  of  thousands  of
men,  women  and  children  have  died   in  the  righting.   They
will  continue  to  die  unless  there  is  an  unparalleled  demand
from  the  American people  that  the  slaughter  be  halted.   The
American   Friends  Service  Committee  calls  for   a  halt  now.
U.S.  military  and  government  leaders  are  fostering  illusions.
What  Our  B-52s  Are   Doing
The  human  situation  today  in  Vietnam  is worse  than  it  has
ever  been.  An  entire nation  is being  destroyed  and  the  tempo
of  destruction  has  increased.   One-third  of  the  rural  people
of   this   rural  nation  have  become   refugees.    Hundreds   of
thousands  of   acres  have  been  defoliated,   countless   villages
have  been  razed.  B-52 raids alone have torn  2i/
2
  million  holes
45  feet  in  diameter  and  30  feet  deep  —  holes  that  serve  as
breeding  grounds  for  malarial  mosquitoes.   More  tons  of  ex-
plosives  have  been  dropped  on  this  tiny  country  than  on  all
the  Axis powers  in  World  War  II,  and  with  every  month  the
loads  are  bigger  and  the  bombs  heavier.   In  December,   1968,
the  U.S.  for  the  first  time  began  using  in  Vietnam   10,000-
pounds  that  had  been  stored  in  military  depots  for  15 years.
The  suffering  of  the  Vietnamese  has  reached  levels  that  would
appall  the  American people  if  they could  see it.  The  American
Friends  Service  Committee,  which  has  been  involved  in  the
relief  of  war  suffering  for  more  than  half  a century,  has  rarely
encountered  such  misery as  in  Vietnam  today.
The   U.S.   has   stepped   up   its  military  activity   since   the
bombing  of  the  North  was  halted  on  November   1.   There
are  more  U.S.  troops  in  Vietnam  than  ever.   The  number  of
battalion-sized   operations  initiated  by  the   Allies  has   grown
steadily  since  the  bombing  halt:  in  November,   800;   in  De-
cember,  956;  in  January,  1077.   The  total  tonnage  of  bombs
dropped   has   increased:   in   January,   129,700,    the   highest
monthly  tonange  since the  war  began.  U.S.  battle  deaths  show
a  rise  every  month  since  the  bombing  halt:  703   Americans
in  November;  1265  in  March.
The  countryside  has  not  been  pacified;  it  is  less  secure  in
1969   than   it  was  in   1965.    Even  the  major  cities,   though
ringed  with  fortifications,  are  vulnerable  to  attack.    Quaker
Thieu  Gets More  Democratic  All  The  Time
"Recently,   [Thieu]   told  village  and  hamlet  officials
at  the  resort  of  Vingtau  that  'there  are  Communists
among  the  Nationalist  ranks.   They  are  the  intellec-
tuals.    The   Vietnamese  people   have   shed   so  ranch
blood   and  yet   there   remain  those  intellectuals,   who
would  readily  cooperate  with  the  Communists.'   Thieu
went  on,  'I  will  not  let  these  people  stab  you  in  the
back.   It  is  only  just  and democratic  to  arrest   them.'"
—Joseph  B.  Treaster  in  The New York  Times,  May  4.
workers  report   anti-American  feeling  has  never  been  so  in-
tense.   The  Thieu-Ky  government   is  a  military   government
propped   up  by  American  power,   despised   and  corrupt.  Free-
dom of  speech  is  suppressed.   No  one  knows  how  many  Viet-
namese  political  prisoners  languish  in  Vietnam's   prisons,  but
the  figure  is certainly  in  the  thousands  and  includes  university
professors,  religious  leaders,  lawyers,  students,  newspaper   edi-
tors,  politicians  —  anyone who has dared  to  advocate  political
initiatives  to  end  the  war.   Many  of  the  leading  figures  in  the
Saigon  government  fought  for  the  French  against  their  coun-
trymen.  Whatever  the  outcome,  they  will  be  swept  away  once
the  Vietnamese  regain  control  of  their  own  affairs.
It  is  not  hardware  or  training   that  is  lacking  in   Saigon's
armies.   It  is will.   A  Vietnamese  dressed  in  the  peasant  garb
of  the  NLF  is  one  of  the  world's  most  formidable   fighting
men;  the  same  man  in  the  uniform  of  Saigon  is  one  of  the
poorest.   Why?   Because  one  believes  he  fights  to  drive  the
foreigner  from  his  soil  while  the  other  fights  only  to  sustain
the  power  of  a corrupt  military clique.
As  the  only  foreigners  in  South  Vietnam,  -the U.S.  and  its
allies  have  nothing  to  negotiate  but  the  rate  and  manner  of
their  withdrawal.   There  will  be  suffering  and  turmoil  if  the
U.S.   leaves.   Withdrawal   does  not  mean  that  justice  will  be
done.   But  whatever   happens  will  in  our  judgment   be  pre-
ferable  to  going  on  with  the  present   agony  that  is  literally
destroying   Vietnam,   undermining   our   own  domestic   social
fabric,  and  damaging  our  country's  name  in  the  world  com-
munity.   Every day  sees  the  armed  forces  of  the  world's  most
powerful  nation  raining  bombs  and  chemicals  and  napalm  on
the  .rice  fields  and  bamboo  huts  of  one  of  the  poorest  and
most   defenseless.    As  long  as  this  continues,   millions   must
wonder  whether  the  Americans   have  become  the  New  Bar-
barians.    Let  us  order  a  cease-fire   and   a  withdrawal,   uni-
laterally  and  immediately.   Let  us  get  on  with  the   rebuilding
of  their  country  and  ours,  and  lifting  the  burden  of  poverty
from  the  backs  of  Vietnamese  and  Americans  alike.
"Puff  The Magic Dragon"  As  Seen  From Below  Among Its  Helpless  Victims
"Several   of   us   went   to   the   roof   about   3   a.m.   The
American  unleashed  the  terrifying 'Puff  the  Magic Dragon,'
a   DC3  that   spews  forth   5000   machine  gun   bullets   per
minute.    Watching   it   circle  overhead  last   night   I   could
visualize  the  scene  below.   Men,  women,  children  and  ani-
mals,  caught  like  rats  in  a  flood.  No   place  to  hide,  no
way   to   plead  their  case  of   innocence   to  the  machine  in
the  sky,  no  time  to  prepare  for   death.
"Sitting  behind  the  others  on the  roof  I  felt  tears  welling
up  and  was  shocked  as  I  became  aware of  feelings  foreign
to  my  conscious  self,  which  surfaced  under  the  indescrib-
able  strain  of  watching man slaughter  man  en  masse.   The
cold,  mechanical com passionless   way  that  monster   circled
around,   ruthlessly   pursuing  an  unseen   'enemy,'   stabbing
viciously   earthward  again   and  again,   probing,   searching,
killing  and maiming  all  in its  path  ...     We have  survived,
but  a  lot  of  Quang  Ngai   people  didn't  make  it.    And  a
lot  more  who  are  now  clinging  to  life  over  at  the   hospital
will  not  make  it  until  morning."
—Letter  from   a  Quaker  worker  in  Quang  Nai,   late  in
February  1969, cited  in  the  AFSC   White   Paper.
"How  can  I  tell   yon  what  it   was  like!    These   people
coming  in  filthy,  with  glazed  looks,  numb.  Nobody  talking,
nobody  erying   and  the   sounds   of   furious   battle  not   yet
ended  pursuing  them  in   the   door.   The  emergency  room
floor,  still  covered  with  blood  from  yesterday's  casualties,
smelled  in  the  heat  of  the  day  and  was  oppressive."
—Another   Quaker  letter  from   Quang  Nai,   same.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  May  19,1969
(Continued  from  Page  One)
degenerating    into   a   dogma,    and    fresh    thoughts    freezing
into  lifeless  party  line.   Those  who  set  out  nobly  to  be  their
brother's   keeper   sometimes   end   up   by  becoming   his  jailer.
Every  emancipation  has  in  it  the  seeds  of  a  new  slavery,  and
every  truth  easily  becomes  a  lie.  But  these  perspectives,  which
seem   so   irrefutably   clear   from   a  pillar   in   the   desert,   are
worthless  to  those  enmeshed  in  the  crowded  struggle.    They
are  no  better  than  mystical  nonsense  to  the  humane  student
who  has  to  face  his   draft   board,   the  dissident  soldier   who
is  determined  not   to   fight,   the   black   who   sees   his  people
doomed   by  shackles  stronger   than   slavery  to  racial  humilia-
tion  and   decay.   The  business  of  the  moment  is  to  end   the
war,  to  break  the  growing  dominance  of  the  military  in  our
society,   to   liberate   the   [slacks,   the   Mexican-American,   the
Puerto   Rican   and   the   Indian   from   injustice.   This   is   the
business  of   our  best  youth.    However   confused   and   chaotic,
their   unwillingness   to   submit   any  longer   is  our   one   hope.
Revolutionaries  In  A  Free  Society
There   is  a  wonderful  story  of   a   delegation   which   came
here  to  see  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  on  some  reform  or   other.
When  they  were  finished  the  President  said,  "Okay,   you've
convinced  me.   Now  go  on  out  and  bring  pressure  on   me."
Every  thoughtful  official   knows   how   hard   it   is  to   get  any-
thing  done  if  someone  isn't  making  it  uncomfortable  not  to.
Just  imagine  how  helpless   the  better   people   in   government
would  be  if  the  rebels,  black  and  white,  suddenly  fell  silent.
The   war  might   smolder  on   forever,  the   ghettoes   attract  as
little  attention   as   a   refuse   dump.    It   is  a  painful  business
extricating   ourselves  from   the   stupidity  of   the   Vietnamese
war;  we  will  only  do  so  if  it  becomes  more  painful  not   to.
It   will   be   costly  rebuilding   the   ghettoes,   but   if   the   black
revolt   goes   on,  it  will   be  costlier  not   to.    In  the   workings
of  a  free  society,  the  revolutionist  provides  the  moderate  with
the  clinching  argument.   And  a  little  ##-reason  does  wonders,
like   a  condiment,   in   reinvigorating   a  discussion   which   has
grown  pointless  and  flat.
We  ought  to  welcome  the  revolt  as  the  one  way  to  prod
us  into  a  better  America.   To  meet  it  with  cries  of  "law  and
order"  and  "conspiracy"   would  be  to  relapse  into  the   sterile
monologue  which  precedes  all  revolutions.  Rather  than  change
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send  A  Sample  Copy  of  This  Issue To  A
A.Few  Copies  Of  The   English  Edition  of  Stone's
Only  81%  On Net  Worth!
"Washington—Major   issue   raised    by   the    renego-
tiation   case   being   contested   by   Grumman  Aircraft
Engineering   Corp.   is   whether   aerospace   companies
whose   sales   skyrocketed   to   meet   Vietnam   war   de-
mands  should  have  their  profits   slashed   because  they
appear  excessive   by  the  yardstick  of  net  worth.   This
is   the   same   problem  the   industry   faced  during   the
Korean  war  period  when  unilateral  determinations  by
the  Renegotiation  Board  against  major  aerospace  firms
mounted  to  more  than  $100  million.  The  board's  deter-
mination    of    $7.5    million   excessive    profits   against
Grumman  for  the  calendar  year  1965  is  now  in  a  pre-
liminary   phase   here   before   U.S.    Tax   Court   Judge
John   E.   Mulroney.    Grumman's  profits   for   the   year
averaged   a   moderate   6.5%   of   sales.    But   the  board
said  the  company's  81%  return  on  net  worth  'clearly
indicates   the   presence   of   excessive   profits.'"
—Aviation   Week  &  Space   Technology,   April    H.
old  habits,  those  in  power  always  prefer  to  fall  back  on  the
theory  that  all  would  be  well  but  for  a  few  malevolent   con-
spirators.   It  is  painful  to  see  academia  disrupted,  but   under
the   surface   were   shams   and   horrors  that   needed   cleansing.
The   disruption   is  worth   the   price   of   awakening   us.    The
student  rebels  are  proving  right  in  the  daring  idea  that  they
could   revolutionize   American   society   by   attacking   the   uni-
versities   as  its   soft   underbelly.    But   I   would   also   remind
the  students  that  the  three  evils  they  fight—war,  racism  and
bureaucracy—are  universal.   The   Marxism-Leninism   some  of
the   rebels   cling   to   has   brought   into   power   a   bureaucracy
more   suffocating   than   any   under   capitalism;   the    students
demonstrate   everywhere  on   our   side  but   are  stifled  on   the
other.    War   and   imperialism  have   not   been   eliminated   in
the   relations   between   Communist    States.    Black   Africa,   at
least  half-freed  from   the  white  man,  is  hardly  a  model   of
fraternity    or   freedom.    Man's   one    real    enemy    is   within
himself.    Burning   America   down   is  no   way  to  Utopia.    If
battle  is  joined  and  our  country  polarized,   as  both  the  revo-
lutionists  and  the  repressionists   wish,  it  is  the  better  and  not
the  worser  side  of  America   which   will  be  destroyed.    Some-
one   said   a  man's   character   was  his   fate,   and   tragedy   may
be  implicit  in  the  character  of  our  society  and  of  its   rebels.
How  make  a  whisper  for  patience heard  amid  the  rising  fury?
Friend  —  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
"Haunted   Fifties"  Available  At  $4.95   Each.
FOR
For  the  enclosed
STONE'S   NEW  BOOK
56.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time  of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)    Name
Street
City
Indicate   if
Please  renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.
4420  29th   St.
Zip
gift   announcement
enter)   a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  Q
the   enclosed  $5:
Statp
F.  Stone's  Weekly
                           B
/i9/69
N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20008
/  F. Stone's  Weekly
4420  29th  St.,  N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
(Note  Corrected   Address)
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's   Weekly.   Second   Class  Postage   Paid  at   Washington,  D. C.   Published  every   other   Monday   at   4420   29th   St     N  W      Waahincrtnr.    n   r
An  independent  weekly  published and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  US-'  16  in  Can»H»-
J10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe:  $20  to  Israel.  Asia  and  Africa.                                               Canada.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED