I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969jun30.pdf

============================================================

Revealing:  $6.2  Billion More  For  Thieu,  P  .2
We  Salute The  Finest  Graduating Class in America's History — That of  1969
"It  can  be  said  of  this  class  that  we  protested against  injustice and discrimination and  we  were right.  We  demanded  an
end to  poverty  and we were right. We refused  to accept an unjust  war and we were right.  . .  Let  us  hope that  in-the future
it  can be  said  of  us  that  we  refused  to  accept our society  as  it  was, and instead worked  to  make  it  closer  to what  it  can be,
because that too will be right."
—John  E.  Rarer  at  Harvard's  Commencement June 1%.
IR   Stone's  Weekly
JMnm   P»y/»/Vr/i/v7  R**_T/l//>/>i/*i                         *^
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
VOL  XVII,  NO.  13
JUNE  30,  1969
01
       WASHINGTON,  D. C.20  CENTS
Toward  A  2nd  Assassination of Martin  Luther King?
The  use  of  the  police  as  a  domestic  army  to  maintain  the
status  quo  is  not  new.  "For   decades,"   says  a  newly  released
staff  report  to  the  Commission  on  Violence,*  "the  police  were
the  main  bulwark  against   the   labor  movement:   picket  lines
were  roughly  dispersed,  meetings  were  broken  up,   organizers
and  activists  were  shot,  beaten,  jailed  or  run  out  of  town."
This  was  still  true  only  30  years  ago.  The  dangers  of  a  police
state  are  far  greater  today  because  the  labor  movement   not
only  has  become  a  pillar  of  the  status  quo,  but  the  unskilled,
underpaid  "ethnic"   minorities  it  then  organized   have  them-
selves  become  resistant  to  change,  fearful   of  a  new  "under-
class"  pushing  from  below  to share their  place  in  the  sun.  The
election  of  a  police  detective  as  Mayor  of  Minneapolis,  long
a  Democratic-Farmer  Labor  stronghold,  against  a  conventional
Republican  candidate  backed  by  Nixon,   is  a  portent   of  this
shift  to  the  nightstick.  So  is  the  victory  of  rightist  candidates
in   New   York's   Mayoralty  primaries.   The   police  point  of
view  has  never  had  so broad  a  constituency.
If  It  Weren't  For  Agitators
The  essence  of  the  police  mentality  is  a  belief  that   social
unrest  is  best  met  by  force.  Its  corollary  is  that  there  would
be  no  trouble  if  it  were  not  for  "agitators."  It  rests  on  the
conspiracy  theory  of  history  and  it  is  profoundly   antithetical
to  democracy,  for  it  instinctively  regards  dissent  as   "subver-
sive."  This  is  "the  law"  as  an  ever  wider  spectrum  of  black,
brown  and  white  dissent  has  begun  to  feel  it.   The  struggle
is  on  again  between  demonology  and  democracy,  as  we  knew
it  30  years  ago  and  can  read  about  it  in  every  earlier   period
of  American   social  change.  The  danger  to  a  free   society  is
greater   because  the  line  between  have  and  have-not  has  be-
come  racial.  This  is  highly  inflammable.  If  we  are  to  avoid
a  full-scale  civil  war,  it  is  urgent  that  we  remember  at  home
what  we  constantly  forgot   in  Southeast   Asia—that  the   root
causes  are  social  and  political  and  that  force  will  only  exacer-
bate  conflict.
Forty  pages  of  the  new  Violence  Commission  report  on  The
Politics  of  Protest  are  devoted  to  the  police  and  their  intrusion
Portrait  of  The Police
We   find   that   the   policeman  in   America   is   over-
worked,  undertrained,  underpaid and undereducated. His
difficulties  are  compounded  by  a  view  expounded  at  all
law   enforcement  levels  —   from  . the   Director  of   the
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  to  the  patrolman  on
the  beat.   This  view   gives  little  consideration   to  the
effects  of  such  social  factors  as  poverty and discrimina-
tion  and  virtually  ignores  the  possibility  of  legitimate
social  discontent.  Typically,  it  attributes  mass  protest
instead  to  a  conspiracy  promulgated  by  agitators  .  .  .
Police   view   students,   the   anti-war   protestors,    and
blacks  as  a  danger  to  our  political  system,  and  racial
prejudice  pervades  the  police  attitudes  and  actions.  No
government  institution appears so  deficient  in  its  under-
standing  of  the  constructive  role  of  dissent  in  a  consti-
tutional democracy as  the  police.
—The  Politics  of  Protest.  A  new   staff    report  to  the
National  Commission  on  Violence  by  Jerome   Skolniek.
•The   Politics   of   Protest.  A   Staff   Report  to  the  Na-
tional   Commission   on   The   Causes   and   Prevention   of
Violence  prepared by  Jerome Skolniek. 276 pps.  U.S.  Supt.
of  Documents,  $1.25.
4  *
into  politics.  Jerome  H.   Skolniek  and  his   staff   have  done  a
brilliant  and  indispensable  analysis.  There  are  thoughtful  and
educated  men  in  the  police  but  most  policemen  are  racist  and
repressive.  They  would  have  elected   Goldwater   in   1964   and
Wallace  in  1968.   Their  indoctrination   makes  them  peculiarly
unfit  to  deal  with  a  crisis  of  aspirations.   "It  is  difficult,"  the
new  report  says—
to  find  police  literature  which  recognizes   that  the  imper-
fection  of  social  institutions  provides  some  basis  for   the
discontent   of   large   segments   of  American  society   .  .  .
organized  protest  tends  to  be  viewed  as  the  conspiratorial
product  of  authoritarian agitators—usually   "Communists"
—who  mislead otherwise  contented  people  .  .  .  Thus  Mr. J.
Edgar  Hoover,  before  the   Commission  on  September  18,
1968,   stated that:  "Communists are  in  the  forefront  of  civil
rights,   anti-war  and  student   demonstrations  ..."    His
views  are  reflected  and  disseminated  throughout  the  na-
tion—by  the  news  media  and  by  FBI  seminars,  briefings
and  training  for  local   officials.
All  the  warnings  of  the  Violence  Commission   staff   report
are  pointed  up  by  the  sweeping  right  to  wiretap   claimed  by
the  new  Attorney  General  in  the  Chicago  convention   demon-
stration  cases  and  by  J.  Edgar  Hoover's  defense  of  the  FBI's
action  in  tapping  the  wires  of  Martin  Luther  King.  The  At-
torney  General's  claims  illustrate  the  tendency  toward   lawless-
ness  inherent  in  the  policeman's   view  that  he  is  "the   law"
(Continued   on  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  SO,  1969
THE  MOST  IMPORTANT  REVELATION  about  our  future  Vietnam
plans  has  gone  almost  unnoticed  at  p.  64  of  the  just  released
Senate   Appropriations    hearings   on   the   '69   second   supple-
mental.  We  plan  to  spend  $6.2  billion  in  the  next  five  years
on  the  South  Vietnamese  Army.  This  may  not  be  enough   to
enable  Thieu  on  his  own  to  win  the  war  but  it  will  certainly
give  him  the  firepower  to  maintain his  dictatorship.  The  long-
range  planning   is  for  long-range   involvement.   The   strategy
is  still—as  one  Pentagon   official  explained  privately  earlier—
to  reduce  the  number  of  U.S.  combat  troops  and  the  fighting
to  a  level  the  U.S.  public  will  tolerate  for  a  long  pull.  Even
Clifford   suggests   leaving   air-lift   and   air   support   forces   in
Vietnam  after  combat  troops  have  left.
IF   CONGRESS  REALLY  WANTS  to  set  an  example  in  law   and
order,  it  will  pay  Adam  Clayton  Powell  his  back  pay,  reim-
burse  his  fine  and  restore  his  seniority.  There  is  solid  consti-
tutional   ground   for   the   Supreme   Court's   decision   that   the
House  had  no  right  to  exclude  him  in  1967   (or—we  infer—
to  impose  a  $25,000  fine  and  loss  of  seniority  as  the  price of
admission  in  1969).  The  Powell  decision  says  the  House may
punish  or  even  expel  for  misconduct  but  it  may  not   exclude
a  member  who  meets  the  three  qualifications  set  forth  in  the
Constitution  as  to  age,  citizenship  and  residency.  The   Framers
had  in  mind  the  case  of  John  Wilkes,  a  hero  of  the  American
Colonies.   Like  Powell,  Wilkes  was  a  gay  dog  but  he  made
Britain  more  democratic  and  its  press  more  free.  He  was three
times   elected   to   Parliament   and   three   times   excluded.   'He
finally won  his  seat  and  established  the  principle  that  a  duly
elected  member  could  not  be  excluded.  The  Wilkes  precedent
wars  not  breached  here  until  the  end  of  the  Civil  War   when
several  elected  members  from  the  South  were  excluded  on  the
ground  that  they  had  given  aid  and  comfort  to  the  Rebellion.
The  Powell  ruling,  like  that  in  Julian  Bond's  exclusion  from
the  Georgia  legislature,  says a  duly  elected  member  cannot  be
barred  because  the  majority  does  not  like  his  views.  This  is
exactly  what  the  Framers  intended.
NOT  THE  LEAST  OF  THE WARREN COURT'S  final  gifts  to  civil
liberty  was  its  unanimous  per  curiam  decision   reversing   the
conviction  of  a  group  of  Klansmen  under  the  Ohio  Criminal
A  Maverick  Jesuit  Defends   8DS
"The    dangers   are  real:  militarism,  racism  and  the
resulting  poverty.   These  are  the  real  sources  of  vio-
lence  .  .  .   Unless   some  visible  structure  appears  to
move   against   these   evils,   the   SDS   could  disappear
today   and  something  like  it   would  appear  tomorrow
.  .  .  What  the  world  requires  in  the  24th  year  of  the
atomic  age  is  not  the setting  up of  a student  group as a
scapegoat  for  American violence.   What  is  needed  is  an
end  to  the  preparation  for  violence  in  the  arms  race,
in  Vietnam  and  in  the  draft."
—The  Rev.  Richard  T.  McSorley,  S.J.,  assistant  pro-
fessor  of  theology  at  Georgetown  University,   before   the
House    Committee    on   Internal     Security        (formerly
HUAC)    June   17.   Father   McSorley   was   invited   to
appear   after   he  complained  that  the  Committee's  cur-
rent  investigation   of  SDS   was  one-sided  but  Chairman
Ichord   objected   that  Father   McSorley's   statement   did
not   "address   itself    to   the   subject   matter."   He   was
not  allowed  to  read  it  in  full   and  copies  were  taken
-away   from   the  press   table.   He   was   subjected   to  a
standard   model  witch-hunt   interrogation   designed  to
make   him,  give   the  names   of  SDS   members,   to   trap
him  into  contradicting  informer   testimony   and  to  link
him  with  "subversive"   views.    The   one  black  liberal
member  of  the  Committee,  Rep.  Louis  Stokes  of  Cleve-
land,  came to  his   defense.
Syndicalism   Act   and   explicitly   overruling   the   decision   in
Whitney  v.  California  (1927)  a  landmark  case  in  the  witch-
hunt  of  the  early  20s.  The  reversal   established   the  principle
that  mere  advocacy  of  violence  or  revolution   as  a  means  of
social  change  is  protected   by  the  First  Amendment.  Criminal
syndicalism  statutes  were  a  favorite  weapon  against  radicals  in
the  20s and  30s and  could  be  again  in  coming years.  Brandeis's
noble  protest  42  years  ago  in  Whitney  rings  as  true  today.
"Those  who won our  independence  .  .  . knew  that  order  can-
not  be  secured,"  he  wrote,  "merely  through   fear  of  punish-
ment  .  .  .  fear  breeds  repression  .  .  .  repression   breeds   hate
.  .  .  hate  menaces  stable  government  .  .  .  the  path  of  safety
lies  in  the  opportunity  to  discuss  freely  supposed   grievances
...     the  fitting  remedy  for  evil  counsels  is  good  ones."  This
is  the  liberal  tradition  at  its  best.
22  Young  GOP  Congressmen  Give  Nixon  A  Sympathetic  Report  on  Campus  Unrest
"We  came  away  from  our  campus  tour  both  alarmed and
encouraged.   We were alarmed  to  discover  that  this  problem
is  far  deeper  and  far  more  urgent  than  most  realize,  and
that  it  goes  far  beyond  the  efforts  of  organized revolution-
aries.    By   the   same   token,   we   were   encouraged   by   the
candor,  sincerity  and  basic   decency   of   the  vast   majority
of   students   we   met.   Too  often,   however,   we  saw   their
idealism  and  concern  vented  in  aimless  or  destructive  ways.
"It   is  clear  that   if   violence  on  our  campuses   does   not
end,   and  if   the  reaction   to  it   is  on  the  one  extreme   too
lax,   or  on  the  other  extreme  too  harsh  and  indiscriminate,
the   vast   moderate  student   majority   may  be   forced   into
the   arms  of   the   revolutionaries,  and  those   who  seek   to
destroy  the  fabric  of  higher  education  will  have   succeeded.
"There  is  on  the  campus  today  a  new  awareness   of  po-
tential  student  power  and  the  emergence  of  a  large  group,
probably  the  vast  majority  of  student  leaders  and  a  sub-
stantial   number  of   intelligent,   concerned   and  perplexed
young  people  which  has  genuine  concern  over  what  it  feels
is  the  difference  between  the  promise  and  performance  of
America.   The  revolutionaries  on  campus  are   few.   How-
ever,  many  students  can  be  radicalized when violence  occurs.
Also  disillusionment  in  our  system  by  students   can  grow
if  we  place  one  label  on  all  students  and  fail  to  understand
that  they  raise  many  areas  of  legitimate  concern.   Perhaps
our  most  pressing  conclusion  is  that  rash  legislative  action
cutting  off funds  to  entire institutions because of  the  actions
of  a  minority  would  play  directly  into  the  hands  of  hard-
core  revolutionaries.
"A  substantial  number of  black  students  state  that  they
have  lost  faith  in  our  political  system.    They   say   there
'are  political wolves  in  the  South  and  political  foxes  in  the
North.'   The  main  goal  of   the  majority  of  black  students
seemed  to  be  service  to  their  'black  brothers  and  sisters.'
Some  said  they  would  rather  die  for   their  people  in   the
streets  than in Vietnam.
"There  is  considerable  student  opposition  to  our  formid-
able  defense  budget.  Why, they  ask,  do  funds  for  domestic
and  educational programs get  cut  while  the  Defense  budget
goes  almost unchallenged?"
—Abridged   from  a  report   to  Nixon  June  17  by  22  GOP
Congressman,  all  but  two  m  their  SOs, on  their  study   tour
of   the  nation's   campuses.   The  full   text  is  available   from
Rep.  Bill  Brock  (Tenn.)  their  leader.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  June  SO,  1969
SENATOR  FULBRIGHT   PERFORMED  another  public  service  when
he  protested  the  hasty  way  the  confirmation  hearing  on  the
new  Chief  Justice  was  handled   (less  than  19  pages  of  testi-
mony;  hostile  witnesses  were  not  heard)   and  its  swift  sub-
mission  to  the  Senate  before  the  printed  record  was  available.
McCarthy,   Nelson   and   Young   of   Ohio   voted   "Nay"   and
Fulbright  "present"  in  protest.  Both  Eastland's  Judiciary Com-
mittee   (which  scents  a  kindred  spirit   in  Burger)   and   the
Senate  treated  the  highest   post  in  the  nation's  judiciary  as
casually  as  if  it  were  a  Postmastership.
FAR  FROM  OVERSTEPPING  its  authority,  as  some  have  alleged,
the  Supreme  Court  refused  to  be  stultified  and  gulled  when
it  took  jurisdiction in  the  El  Paso  Gas  case  and  remanded  to
the  District  Court  for  the  full  divestiture it  originally  decreed
to  block  the  El  Paso-Natural  Gas  merger  and  to  restore  com-
petition  in  natural  gas  in  California.  The  Nixon  Administra-
tion  is far  from  abiding by  the  Caesar's  wife  rule.  Nixon  and
Attorney  General Mitchell  were  senior  partners  in  the  law firm
through  which  El  Paso  has  been  fighting  this  case  since   1961,
and  the  firm's  fees  were  three  quarters  of  a  million  dollars  in
1961-67.  Four  days  after  Mitchell  took  office,  the  Justice  De-
partment  ordered  the  anti-trust  case  against  El  Paso  dropped.
The   Court   declined  to   be   fooled   by  shifts   in  California's
representation  and  has  ordered  a  "cash  sale"  and  the   "sever-
ance  of  all  managerial  and  financial  connections"   to  stop  the
merger  and  enforce its original  order.
THAT  SENSATIONAL  TESTIMONY   about  the  Black  Panthers  be-
fore  the  McClellan  committee  was  tainted  and  one-sided.  The
witness  was  a  member  who  was  expelled  after  a  robbery  for
which  he  was  convicted.  After  three  months  in  jail,  his  jail
sentence  was commuted  and  his  probation  was  suspended  con-
ditionally.  Thus  he  is  still  under  the  thumb  of  the  authorities.
Unless  the  Committee airs the  other  side of  the  story, this will
On  The  CIA's  Pet   "Operation  Phoenix"
Saigon,  June  20—Memers of  South  Vietnam's  lower
House  bitterly  interrogated  two  high  ranking  Minister
Generals  today  about  police  state   tactics   used   in  the
American-inspired   [and  CIA-supervised—IFS]   Phoenix
program.    Deputies   charge   that   illegal   arrests,   long-
term  imprisonments  without  charges   or  trials,   shake-
downs   and   murders   during   ostensibly   paramilitary
operations  against  guerrilla  agents  have  become  wide-
spread.   The  Phoenix  program,  which  has  been   highly
touted   by   American   officials   since   its   inception   last
Fall,  involves  an  attempt  to  compile  dossiers  on  Viet
Cong   agents   .  .  .   Representative   Tran   Ngoc  Chau,
Secretary  General of  the  House,  said  police  actions  were
often  designed  "to  frame  nationalists  as  Communists."
"Does  the  Government try  to  brand  all  those  who  did
not  vote  for  President  Thieu  —  all  67%  of  the  voters
—  as  Communists  or  pro-Communists?"  he   asked.
—Bentley  Orrick  in  Baltimore  Sun  June  21.
look  like  another  attempt  to  smear  the  Panthers.
WE   URGE  THE GORE  COMMITTEE  to  look  into  that  full  page
advertisement  which  claimed  that  84%  of  the  voters  were  in
favor   of  the  ABM.  Six  former  Presidents  of   the  American
Association  for  Public  Opinion  Research  in  a  joint  letter  to
the  New  York  Times  (June  20)  questioned  its  reliability  and
said  the  methods  used  "must  be  damaging  to  the  professional
standards  of  opinion  research."  It  ought  also  to  question  Wil-
liam  J.  Casey, organizer  and  chairman  of  the  ABM  committee
which  arranged  the  poll  and  ran  the  ad.  Casey  has  now  been
appointed  by  Nixon  to  the  Advisory Committee  of  the  Arms
Control  and  Disarmament  Agency.  This  requires  Senate  con-
firmation.  Casey's  activities  have  long   been  hostile   to  arms
control  and  disarmament. He  was  with  the  Research  Institute
of   America,  a  cold  war  public  relations  outfit,   and  the  Na-
tional  Strategy Information  Center,  a  right  wing  "think  tank."
The  Kind  of  Freedom  Our  Blood  and  Treasure  Defend  in  South  Vietnam
"In a  message  cabled  to  President  Nixon  from  Saigon  the
Study  Team  said:  'Speaking  for  peace  or  in  any  other  way
opposing  the  government  of   South  Vietnam  easily  brings
the  charge  of  Communist sympathy  and  subsequent   arrest
.  . .  There  must  be no  illusion  that  this  climate  of  religious
and  political  suppression   is  compatible  with  either  a  repre-
sentative  or  a  stable   government.'
"Members  of   the  Study  Team   met  with  leaders  of   five
old  line  political  parties   no  longer  permitted  to   function.
These  men have  all  been  active  in  the  resistance  movement
against   the   French   and  were   ardent   nationalists.    Their
parties   have   been   outlawed,   their   requests   to   publish  a
newspaper   have   gone   unanswered.    These   men   reflect   a
vast  middle  position.    They   have  known  imprisonment  and
sacrifice.    (A   retired   General   present   had  been  in   prison
11  times).
"The  large  majority of  those  imprisoned  are  held  because
they  oppose  the   government.    Ambassador   Colby,  General
Abrams'  Deputy  for  Pacification,  said  the  number  of   pris-
oners  had  gone  up  and will  continue  to  go  up  as pacification
continues.    The   Study   Team   spent   several   hours   at   the
Women's   prison.   The  cells  and  large  prison   rooms   were
overcrowded.   This  was  especially   hard  on  nursing   mothers
and those with  small  children.   Sanitation  was  primitive and
inadequate.   Team  members  were  concerned  about  the  large
number  of  prisoners  who had not  been sentenced  after  many
months  of  detention,  the  inhumanity  of  some  sentences  (one
slight  old  woman  who,  according  to  her  dossier,  had  passed
VC  letters,  had served  10  years  of  a  15  year  sentence)  .  .  .
and  the  extreme  youthfulness  of  many  inmates.   There  were
50  children  from  birth  to  13  years  of  age.
"Although   Team   members   observed   no   brutality,   they
noted  the  fearful  reaction  of  the  inmates   whenever   prison
officials  appeared.   All  prisoners  are  oppressed  by  conditions
of   overcrowding.    Sometimes    many  prisoners   are   stuffed
into   small   cells   which   do  not   allow   for   lying   down   or
sometimes  even  for  sitting;  and  this,  when  it  is  steam-hot,
when  excrement  accumulates,   and  when  the  prisoners  are
seldom  released  for  exercise,   is  torture  indeed.   Beating   is
the   most   common   form   of   abuse.     Several    ex-prisoners
testified  that  it  is  not  unusual  to  torture  family   members,
including  children,  before  the  eyes  of  the  prisoners.
"The  Study  Team   has   reached  the   conclusion   that   the
Thieu-Ky  government  has  imprisoned  thousands  of   persons
without  the  most  fundamental  elements  of  a  fair   hearing,
and  in  a  shocking  number of  instances,  without  even  appris-
ing  the  imprisoned  persons  of  the  charges  against   them.
This  extraordinary   development  has  had  a  chilling   impact
on  all  political   activities."
—Abridged   from   the  report   by  a  U.S.  Study   Team  on
Religious  and  Political  Freedom  in  Vietnam  which included
Bishop  James  Armstrong   of  the  United  Methodist  Church;
Robert  F.  Drinan,  S.J.,  Dean  of  Boston  Law  School;  Rear
Admiral  Arnold  E.  True,  ret.  U.S.  Navy  and  Congressman
Conyers  of  Detroit.   Text  at  p.  H4984  Congressional Record
June  IS  or  obtainable from  Conyer's     office.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

I.  F. Stone's  Weekly, June  SO,  1969
Hoover  Has  Smeared  Every  Progressive  Movement  In  His  Time
(Continued   from   Page One)
and  that  the  end  justifies  the  means.  The  Attorney  General
would  read  the  wiretap  restrictions  inherent  in  the   Constitu-
tion  and  explicit  in  last  year's  Crime  Control  Act  as  if  they
did  not  exist,  and  treat  the  wiretap  loopholes   in  the  Act  as
if  they  were  limitless  invitations  to  political  espionage.   The
tapping  of  King's  telephones   shows  that  no  movement, how-
ever  legitimate,  and  no  leadership,  however  world-famous,  is
secure  from  snoop  and  smear.   While  the  excuse  for  tapping
King's  phones  was  "internal   security"  its  chief  result  was  to
permit  the  FBI  to  spread  stories  about  King's  sex  life.
"Barnyard  Gossip"  Not  Internal  Security
Carl  Rowan  in  his  column  (Washington  Star, June  15)  said
"FBI    officials   were   going   before   Congressional    committees
and  partly  justifying  larger  appropriations   by  titillating  some
Congressmen"  with  "tid-bits"  picked  up  through  wiretaps  and
buggings.  In  1964 and  1965 as  head  of  the  U.S. Information
Agency,  Rowan  had  access to  these  FBI  reports.  "I  know  how
much  dirt  the  FBI has dug up," he wrote  of  them  in  a  second
column  June   20,  "and 90  percent   of   it  is  barnyard  gossip
that  has  nothing  to  do  with  'internal  security"  or  'Marxist  in-
fluences.'  "  What  a way to  pander  to  hateful  Southern   stereo-
types!  Imagine  what  could  be  done  with  bedroom  taps  of
Southern   Senators   or   police   chiefs!  How   would   J.   Edgar
Hoover  like  to  have  his  bedroom  tapped  and  the  eavesdrop-
pings  leaked  to  political  enemies?
J.  Edgar  Hoover  has  waged  psychological   warfare  against
every progressive  movement in  America during his  long  tenure
as  head  of  the  FBI. As  far  back  as  the   Dies   Committee   in
the  30s, his  Bureau  helped  to  smear  the  New  Dealers.  When
the  Republicans  won  control  of  Congress  after  the  war, he
gave  Robert  E.  Lee  of  the  FBI, now  of  the  FCC, a  leave  of
absence  to  furnish   the  Taber   committee  with  those  lists  of
"subversives"   in  the  government  with  which  Hoover's  friend,
Joe  McCarthy,  later  made  his  career.  When  the  Republicans
won  the  Presidency  in  1952, Hoover   joined  with   Attorney
General  Brownell  to  put  the  "twenty  years  of  treason"  label
on  the  Democrats.   Now   that  the  Republicans  are  in   again,
Hoover  is  working  at  the  same  old  stand,  but  with  enhanced
power.  His  old  friend  Nixon  is  in  the  White  House.  One man
Portrait  of  A  New  Nixon Appointee
Donald  E.  Johnson  of  West  Branch  today  delivered
a  sharply worded attack  on what  he  termed  "lice-ridden
demagogues"  who  have  disrupted  American "campuses.
Johnson's  remarks  at   the   ROTC  commissioning  cere-
mony  on  the  University of  Iowa  campus  this  morning
came  less  than  24  hours  after  President  Nixon  nomi-
nated  Johnson  to  become  the  Chief  of   the   Veterans'
Administration.   Johnson  blasted  what  he  called  "noxi-
ous  bands  of  defiant  rabble-arrogant  extremists"   .  .  .
among  [them]  Johnson said,  "I place  the   self-professed
Maoists,   Che-ists  and  lice-ridden  demagogues   of   the
New  Left."         —Iowa City  Press-Citizen,  June  6.
"Johnson  had  been  defeated   in  two  bids  for  public
office.   His  first  defeat  was  for  a seat  on the  local school
board  in  1959. He  lost  after  he  instigated  a  move  to
force   the   resignation  of   a   Quaker  teacher   who  had
been  sentenced  to   18  months  in  prison  in  1948 after
being  convicted  of   failure  to  register   for   the  draft.
West  Branch is  a  Quaker community."
—Same  Paper, Same Day, from  West  Branch.
who  shares  Hoover's  troglodyte  views  is Attorney  General  and
another  has  just  been  sworn  in  as  Chief   Justice.  The   King
smears  parallel  Nixon's   "Southern    strategy."
Hoover  first  leaked  word  that  Robert  Kennedy  had  author-
ized  a  King  wiretap  during   the  Oregon  primary  last  year.
Hoover  hated  both  men. In  an  interview  with  the  Washington
Star  June  19,  Hoover   again  blamed   Kennedy  and  attributed
the  tap  to  King's   "Marxist   ideas  and  associations."    Former
Attorney  General  Katzenbach  who  was  Kennedy's  deputy  and
former  Attorney  General  Ramsey. Clark  both  called  Hoover's
version  deceptive.  Hoover  would  like  to  see  King  and Ken-
nedy  assassinated  again,  this  time morally.  Fresh  leaks  to Con-
gressman  Rarick of  Louisiana,  a  backwoods  Joe  McCarthy,  are
previews  of  smears  to  come.*  In  the  wake  of  the   shocking
Algiers  Motel  acquittal,  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  anything
more  likely  further  to  embitter  and  alienate  black   America.
Hoover  has  furnished  the  Violence  Commission  with  Exhibit
A  in  showing  how  the  police  mentality  threatens  racial  peace
and  social  order  in  America.
* See  p.  E4927  of  the  Congressional  Record  June  16 and
page  E5056  of  the  Record  for  June  18.
We'll  Be Clad  to  Send A  Sample Copy of  This  Issue  To  A  Friend —  Send  A  Long  Stamped  Addressed Envelope
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new  book,  In
A Time of Torment  (Random House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City
Indicate  if
Please   renew   (or
Name
Street
City
I.
4420  29th  St.
Zip
gift   announcement
enter)   a  sub  for
Zip
State
wished  (U
the   enclosed   $5:
State
F.  Stone's  Weekly                  6/30/69
N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
I. E  Stone's  Weekly
4420   29th  St., N. W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
(Note  Corrected Address)
Second   class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stone's  Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington,  B.C.  Published   every   other   Monday  at    4420   29th  St.,  N.  W..   Washington.    D. C.
An  independent  weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;  Circulation Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription: $5  in  the  U.S.; $6  in  Canada:
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel, Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED