I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969dec15.pdf

============================================================

Triumph  and  Despair at  The Hunger  Parley,  Pps. 2-3
Straight From the  Crystal Ball of  The Army's Top Guru
It  is  my  opinion  that  if  we  had  continued  to  bomb,  the      to  gain by continuing the  struggle.
war  would  be  over  at  this  time—or  would  be  nearly  over.         —Gen.  Westmoreland,  U.S.  Army  Chief   of  Staff,    at  the
The  enemy  would  have  fully   realized  that  he  had  nothing     House Appropriations  hearings  on  the  1970 Defense   budget.
1. F. Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published Bi- Weekly                    **
VOL.    XVII,  NO.  23
DECEMBER  15,  1969
101
         WASHINGTON, D. C.20  CENTS
The  Atrocities  Nixon  Condones  And  Continues
The   Pinkville  massacre   falls   into   perspective   if   we   re-
member  that  from  the  first  days  of  the  struggle  against  the
French  Gen.   Giap's  strategy  has  been   to  fight  a  "People's
War."   Without   our  ever  fully  realizing  it,  ours  has  become
an  "anti-People's"  war.  Some  years  ago  an  American  Colonel
who  was  never  identified,  put  it  very  plainly. Mao  Tse-Tung,
the  foremost  theoretician  of  the  People's  War,   said  that  the
guerrilla  swims  among  the  people  as  a  fish  does  in  the  sea.
The   U. S.  Colonel   said  we  would   "dry  up   the   sea."   Our
strategy  has   been   to  destroy   the  villages   and  the  crops,  to
drive  out  or  kill  the  people,  wherever  we  suspect  Viet   Cong.
We  set  out  to  create  a  desert  where  no  "fish"  could  live.  The
soldiers   at   Pinkville   may   not   have   been   ordered   to   kill
women  and  children  but  they  were  certainly  ordered  to  burn
down  the  village  and  kill  the  livestock,  to  destroy their  homes
and  their  food  supply. If  the  main target  of  a  "People's  War"
is  to  win  the  confidence  and   support   of  the  peasantry,  the
main  target  of  an  Anti-People's  War  is  to  uproot  or  destroy
the  peasantry  the  guerrillas  may  have  won  over.  From  such
a  strategy  Pinkvilles  come  naturally.
The  Biggest  Booby  Trap  of  All
In  the  rules  of  war,  soldiers  and  civilians  used  to  be  sep-
arate  categories.   The  strategy  of  the  Anti-People's   War  has
given  us  that  legal  monstrosity  we  now  read  about—the  "in-
nocent  civilian."  This  implies  that  some  civilians  are  innocent
and  some  are guilty.  The  latter  are  not  only  fair  game  but  the
safe  rule  when  in  doubt  is  to  shoot  first  and  investigate  later,
or  just  add  them  to  the  body  count.   Horrible  as  this  may
sound,   it  has  its  logic  and  the  logic  grows  stronger   as  the
spiral   of   hate   mounts   on   both   sides.   The   guerrillas   use
civilians  in  their  area—like  the  home  population  in  any war—
for  many  auxiliary tasks.  The  civilians—including  women  and
children—take  up  those  tasks   ever   more  willingly  as  they
see  their   homes  and   livestock,   their  menfolk   and   ancestral
graves,  destroyed  by  indiscriminate  bombing  and  artillery  fire
and  by "search  and  destroy"  missions  like  the  one  in  Pinkville.
Relations   are  not   improved   by  calling  them   "gooks"  or—
more  politely,  as  in  Lt.  Galley's  indictment—"Oriental   human
beings."   They   retaliate  with   home-made   mines  and   booby
traps,  including  the  "ponji",  the  sharpened   stick  coated  with
excrement.   The  biggest  and  dirtiest  booby  trap  of  all  is  the
filthy  pit  of  this  war  itself,  from  which  we  emerge   stinking
in  the  nostrils  of  mankind.
Maybe  If  People  Were Just  A  Little  Dumber?
Rep.   Jamie Whitten  (D.-Miss.):  How  are  you  going
to  make  folks  believe if  the  U. S.  and  the  South  Viet-
namese  couldn't contain the  Viet  Cong  and  North Viet-
namese,  how  in  the  world  are  you  going  to  make any-
body  believe the  South  Vietnamese  can  do  it  by  them-
selves?   ...
Gen.   Westmoreland (Army  Chief   of  Staff):  Well,  I
think  there  are  two  things  that  can  be  done.  One  is
somehow  to  give  the  American people a  deep apprecia-
tion  ...      of  the  way  the  enemy  has  been  weakened
progressively  .  .  .  and how amateurish his  tactics  are,
BO  that  every  time  he  goes  into  battle  he  loses  an  in-
ordinate  number   of  men  .  .  .   Second,  the  American
people  should  be  assured  that  the   South  Vietnamese
army,   DESPITE   THE   WAY   IT   HAS   BEEN  POR-
TRAYED  BY  THE  U.S.  PRESS,  [emphasis  added]  is
doing  very  well  .  .  .  We  are  ahead  of  schedule  .  .  .
Rep.   Whitten: For  10  years  this  committee has  been
listening  pretty  much  to  the  same  type  of  thing  from
that  side  of  the  table.  The  American people  have  been
reading  it.  The  part  that  you  did  not  touch  on  was:
How  are  we  going  to  get  it  over  to  the  people,  make
them  believe it?
Gen.   Westmoreland: I am afraid I  cannot answer  that.
—Pps.  168-8  Pt.   7,  House  Appropriations   hearings
on  the  1970 Defense   budget,  released Dee.  2.
There  is  a  flurry  of  stories  from  Saigon   about  "reindoc-
trinating"  troops  on  the  humane  treatment  of  civilians.  But
we  are  dealing  here  not  with  an  occasional   atrocity  but  with
a   deliberate  policy.   What   a  fear-crazed   and  hate-filled   GI
may  do  in  occupying  a  hostile  village  can  be  put   down  to
the   brutalization   of   war.   The   real   crime   is   higher   up.
When   the   President   announced   that   he  was   revising   our
chemical   and   bacteriological   warfare  program   and   sending
the  Geneva  Protocol  to  the  Senate  for  ratification,  it   looked
like  a gesture  of  contrition.  It  turned  out  to  be  the  most  hypo-
critical  kind  of  public  relations.   For  it  excepted   from  these
restrictions  the   two  weapons   of   gas  and   chemical   warfare
from  which  the  civilian  population   of  Vietnam  suffer  most.
These  are  the  tear  and  lung  gases  which  drive  them  out  of
their  home-made  bombing  shelters  into  the  open   where  our
B-52s  and  fragmentation   "anti-personnel"  bombs  can  destroy
them,  and  the  herbicides  which  kill  their  crops  and  threaten
—like  Thalidomide—their   unborn  children.
How  can  we  convince  the  world  that  we  have  not  turned
(Continued  On  Page  Four)
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   Dee.  15, 1969
Triumph  and  Despair  Closely  Linked  in  The  Hunger  Conference  . . .
There  was  a  moment  of  triumph  at  last  week's   conference
here  on  hunger  and  there  was  a  moment  of  despair.  They
came  close  to  each  other.  The  moment of  triumph  came when
the  Conference  by  acclamation  approved  a  5-point   program,
the  most  radical  of  its  kind  ever  adopted  at  an  official  meet-
ing,  which would indeed wipe out  hunger  in America  if imple-
mented.  It   included  a  guaranteed  annual   income  of  $5500
a  year  for  a  family  of  four,  as  compared  with  the  $1600  a
year  plus  $720  in  food   stamps   offered   by  Nixon's  pending
welfare  legislation.  The  moment  of  despair   came  when  the
conviction  spread  that  all  this  would  remain  manana  unless
there was  pressure  on the  White  House  to  act  before the  con-
ference  disbanded.  Militants   seized  the  platform  in  the  huge
Sheraton  Hall  of  the  Sheraton-Park  Hotel,  and  begged   the
delegates  to  stay-in  until  the  White  House  responded.  Their
pleas   grew   more   desperate   as   more   and   more    delegates
walked   out  until  barely   a  hundred   were  left.   Even   these
lost  heart  when  the  lights  began  to  dim and  the  TV  cameras
were  dismantled.  It   looked  to  the   real   spokesmen   of  the
hungry  as  if  words  were  again  the  only  outcome.
The  School  Lunch  Scandal
Even  a  handful,  had  they   stayed   all  night,  launching  a
continuous  stay-in   and  talk-in,  a  filibuster  of  the  desperate
poor,  might  soon  have  slowly attracted  support  and  captured
the  imagination  of  the  country,  or  forced  the  government  to
call  the  police  and  put  them  out  into  the  cold,  to  which  they
are  so  well  accustomed.   What  the  radicals   wanted   was  a
stay-in  until  the  President  invoked  Section  11 of  the  Disaster
Relief   Act   of   1969  and   declared   hunger   a   national   emer-
gency.  Less than  half  the  poor  now get  either  food  stamps  or
surplus  commodities.  Even  the  school  lunch  program,  though
24 years old,  still  reaches less than half  the  country's  hungry
schoolchildren.  A  former   Agriculture   Department    official—
Rodney  E.  Leonard—told  the  conference  more  than  half   the
inadequate   school  lunch  funds  go  to  purposes   other   than
feeding  the  children.  The  worst  school  lunch  record  is  not  in
the  South  but  in  the  ghettoes  of  the  Northeast.*   The  stay-in
pleaders   wanted   something   to  take   home:  free    breakfast
and  lunch programs  for  all  needy  children,  free  food  stamps
for   the  poorest,  a  cut  in  the  cost  for  the  rest,  and   either
food   stamps   or   surplus   commodities   in   the   307   counties
which  do  not  have  either  now.
From   Moon  Man  To  Con  Man
Q.  Can you explain your job  for  us,  please?
A.  Now,  if  we  can  talk  very  clearly  from  a  distance
of  a  quarter  million  miles,  I  would  hope  that  some of
that  expertise  or  technique  might  be  carried   over  to-
ward  opening  up  the  lines  of  communication which  we
presently   find   somewhat   constricted,   particularly   in
regard  to  the  youth of  this  country.
Q.  Col.   Collins,   what   made  you  decide   to  trade  in
your  space  suit  for  a  diplomat's  pinstripe?
A.  The  hope  to  make  our  country  more  united  in  its
approach  to  foreign  policy.
Q.  What's   your   attitude   toward   student   dissent,
particularly  as  to  the  war  in  Vietnam?
A.  Most  of  the  dissenters  are  poorly  equipped  with
the  facts.
Q.  Col.  Collins,  have  you  had   any   prior   experience
in  public  affairs  during  your  military  career?
A.  No.
—Col.  Michael  Collins,  who  commanded  the  first  trip
to  the  moon,  at  his  first  press  conference   as  Assistant
Secretary   of  State  for   Public  Affairs,     after    17  years
in  the  Air  Force,  Nov.  28   (abridged).
*For  the   full   story,  told  with  burning   passion,  read   Nick
Kotz's  new  book.  Let  Them  Eat   Promises:   The  Politics  of
Hunger  in  America  (Prentice  Hall).
The  Administration  holds  back  because  it  is  fighting  in-
flation.  But  what  kind  of  fight  on  inflation  is  this,  when  the
main  cause  of  the  inflation—the  war   in  Vietnam—goes  on?
It  is  the  more  than  $100  billion   spent  on  Vietnam,   without
price  controls  or  war  profits  taxes  on  those  who  made  the
most  money  from  it,  which  ignited  the  inflationary  prairie
fire. The latest  Pentagon  figures  show  its  spending  this fiscal
year  is  only  down  $1.6  billion  from  last.  The  Joint  Economic
Committee's  latest  report  on  the  Federal  budget  says  that
while  the  rate  of  Vietnam  spending  is  expected  to  be  down
$8  billion  by  the  middle  of  next  year,  non-Vietnam  defense
spending  will  be  up  $4.5  billion  a  year  by  then,   absorbing
most  of  that  "peace  dividend,"  which  could  feed  the  hungry.
If  the  war  flares  up,  or  the  Saigon  regime  totters,  Vietnam
spending   will   go  up   several   billion   overnight.   There   will
not  be a  moment's  hesitation.  Why  not  some  action  at  home,
on  the  hunger  front,  where  the  poor  have  paid  twice  for  the
war  in  Vietnam ?  First  they  paid  in  hunger  for  the  inflation,
which  has  reduced  the  dollar's value  by  16.6  cents  since  1964.
Now  the first-to-be-fired are  paying  again  in  the  deflationary
program,   which  depends  for  its   efficacy   on  fewer  jobs  and
reduced  Federal  spending.  The  poor  bear  the  brunt  of  the
economic  see-saw,   the  ups  and  the   downs.
Closed  Door  Testimony  Shows  Pentagon  Chiefs  Still  See  Peace  A  Long  Way  Off
Chairman  Mahon  (D.-Tex.):  I  interpret  your   testimony
to  mean that we are  not  looking forward  to  an  early  ending
of  the  war  in  Vietnam,  but  that  we  are  looking  forward  to
shifting   more  of  the   burden  of   fighting   the   war   to   the
South  Vietnamese. Is  that  about  right?
Secretary  of  the  Army Resor: That  is  about  right,  except
that  I  don't  look  forward  to an indefinite  war . . .
Mr.  Mahon:  Do  you  think  that  the  ending  of  the  hostili-
ties  in  Vietnam is  a  matter  of  months  or  years?
Gen.  Westmoreland:  I  believe,  sir,  we can  anticipate  that
the  intensity  of  combat  generally  will  subside  ...    I  believe
we  can   anticipate  having   forces   in  Vietnam  for   several
years  . . . The uncertain  element  has been  that  of will. We
have  not  projected  to  the  regime  in  Hanoi  the  will  to  stick
with  this  until we grind  them down   ...
Mr.  Whitten   (D.-Miss.):  ...    for ten  years  it  (the   war)
has  been  going  on ...    We were  told  by  the  former  Secre-
tary  of  Defense  for a  number  of  years  .  .  .  that  we could
expect  that  this  thing  would  be  over  and  he  would  give  us
a  timetable.  That  never  did pan out . . . The enemy has  not
accepted  defeat  .  .  . how much  credence  can we give  your
honest  calculations?
Secretary  Resor: ...   I  think  we seriously  underestimated
the  problem ...   I think today  we have a  much better  under-
standing  of  the  problem.  Accordingly  I  think  that  our  esti-
mates  of  the  current  situation  should  be  significantly  more
valid.  However,  I  do  not  want  to  be  in  the  position  of  pre-
dicting  to  you  how  long  it  will  take.  I  think  that  is  one of
the  lessons  we  have  learned,  that  it  is  dangerous  to  make
predictions.  I  can  only  say  I  think  time  is  running  on  our
side  in  Vietnam. Therefore  if  we  can  just  buy  some  time  in
the  U.S.  by  these  periodic  progressive  withdrawals  and  the
American  people  can  just  shore  up  their   patience  and  de-
termination,  I  think  we can  bring  this  to  a  successful   con-
clusion. . . .
Mr. Whitten:  General,  could  you add to that?
Gen. Westmoreland:  ...   I  have  never  made the  prediction
that  this  would be other  than  a long  war.
—Pp8.  162-174  Pt.  7  House  Appropriations   hearings  on
the  1970  Defense   budget.  Oct.  8.  Released  Dec.  2.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's   Weekly,   Dee.  15, 1969
. . . How The Poor  Pay Twice For The Inflation  The War  Caused
In  one way it  is a  miracle that  this  Administration,  whose
constituency  is  the  smug  and  comfortable,    called   a  hunger
conference   at   all.   The  average   Republican   thinks   people
are  poor  only  because  they  do not  want  to  work.  It  was  also
a  miracle  that  a  conference   which  started  out  looking  as if
it  were  pre-packed  with  advertising  men  and  food  industry
executives   and   programed   to   discuss   "nutrition"   instead
of  hunger  should  have  been  turned  around  by  a  handful  of
militants  to  the  point  where  it  voted   $5500  a  year  for  a
family  of  four.  This  was  largely  the  triumph  of  those  won-
derful  black  welfare  mothers  who run  the  National   Welfare
Rights  Organization  with  the  skilful   aid  of  George   Wiley,
the   chemistry  professor   who  has   discovered   the  elixir   to
invigorate  and  organize  those  who  are   most  desperate  in
the  ghettoes.  Their  pleas,  and  those  of  the  other  oppressed,
Indian,  Mexican-American,   Puerto  Rican   and   white   Appa-
lachian,  had  an  impact  far  beyond  their  numbers.  The  voice-
less  found  voices  and  hunger  bred  eloquence.  What  human
resources  lie  wasted  in  submerged   groups  which  can  from
among   their   own   ill-educated   ranks   breed   spokesmen   of
such  power!
"For  All  Time"  or  Manana  Forever?
But  how  many  times  does  hunger  have  to  be  documented
before  there  is  adequate  action   to  end  it?   Nixon  said  last
May  that  the  moment  had  come  to  end  it  for  all  time.  But
his  Department  of  Agriculture  is  fighting  to  block  in   the
House   the   Senate-passed   McGovern   food   stamp  bill.  The
Republican  leadership  is  trying  to  gut  the  poverty  program,
and   also   the  voting  rights  act  which  has   given   the   poor
blacks  in  the  South  a  little  political  muscle.  Nixon's   speech
opening   the   conference   showed   real  feeling   only   when   he
told  again  that  story  of  eating  cottage  cheese  with  ketchup
on  his  own reducing  diet.  He  said  the  conference  "marks  an
historic  milestone."  Of  action   by  the  government?   Or   fur-
ther  despair  on  the  lonely  Indian  reservations  and  in  the
ghettoes where  only the rats grow  fat?
Even  as  the  hungry   pleaded,   the  Senate  was  putting  the
finishing  touches   on  a  scandalous   "tax   reform"   bill  which
might  have  supplied  all  the  funds  we need  to  end hunger.  To
close  the   tax   loopholes  on  oil  depletion,  capital  gains  and
other  tax  rackets,  would  bring  in  $12  billion  in  extra   rev-
enue.  Instead   the   minor   reforms   will   bring  in   only   $1.4
billion  the  next  fiscal  year.  The  Senate,  for  example,  would
cut  only   $155   million  from  the   $1.6   billion  annual   subsidy
to  oil millionaires  via  depletion.  Even  the  so-called  tax   relief
to  the  poor  will  disproportionately   open  new  avenues  of  tax
reduction   for   middle  and   upper   incomes.   Even   under   the
Silent  Majority  Footnotes
The  Louis  Harris  poll,  owned  by  the  Chicago  Tribune,
a  paper  even  Agnew  can  love,  reports  a  turnabout  in
peace  sentiment   (Wash.  Post  Dec.  4).  Its  poll  after  the
October  Moratorium  was  45  to  39%  against  the  peace
demonstrations.  Its  poll  after  the  November Mobiliza-
tion  was  46  to  45% in  favor.  The  answers  to  two  spe-
cific  questions  were  striking.  The  first  was  whether  the
war  was  "morally  indefensible."   In  October  51%  agreed
and  35%  disagreed.  In  November  52%  agreed  and  37%
disagreed.   The   second   question   wag  whether  demon-
strators   were   "just   a  bunch  of   hippies."   In  October
55%  disagreed  with  this  and  33%  agreed.  In  November
58%  disagreed  and  31%  agreed.
Senator   Young  of   Ohio  put  into  the   Congressional
Record  Nov.  13  (p.  S14289)  a  letter  from  an  Ohio  Na-
tional  Guardsman  who  said   that  they   were  asked   to
write  letters  to  the  White  House  supporting  Nixon  on
the  war.  The  State  Commander  called  for  a  report  on
how  many  men  in  the  unit  complied.  "The  instructions
also  stated,  the  letter  said,  "that  the  letters  would have
more  'effect'  if  we  didn't  include  our  military rank  but
signed  them as private  citizens."
Gore  bill,  almost  half  the  benefits  will  go to  those  with  earn-
ings  from   $10,000  to  $20,000  a  year.  A  third  of  the  House
"relief"  bill  would  go  to  those  in  the  top  10%  of  taxpayers.
It  is  time  to  launch  a  campaign  on  the  broadest  possible
front  to  make  people  realize  that  clear  air  and  water,  safer
streets,  and  livable  cities,  are  more  important  than  an  extra
car  or  even  a  summer  home.  The  battle  against  poverty,  pol-
lution,  urban  sprawl,  racism,  drug  addiction  and  crime   are
related  facets  of  one  complex  problem.   The  quality  of   life
will   improve   or  degenerate  for   all,  rich   and   poor,   unless
people  can  be  taught  to  see the  mutual  interest  in   expanded
spending  on  the  starved  public  sector  and  less  on  the  waste-
ful  private  sector.  And  the  first  step  must  be  an  end  to  the
war  in  Vietnam,  and  a  sharp  curb  on the  growing  militarism
and  imperialism   which  can  breed  more  Vietnams.  Half  what
the  Pentagon  spends  each  year  could  wipe  out  poverty  and
all  that  goes  with  it  in  ten  years.  But   Nixon's   press  con-
ference  at  press  time  showed  that  he  regarded  such  thinking
as   a  menace   to  free   enterprise.   It   also  disclosed  that  he
was  turning  thumbs  down  on  effective    food  stamp  and  school
lunch  legislation,   and  throwing   the  poverty   program  to  the
wolves.   His   words   foreshadowed    a   hungry   winter   again.
Fulbright  Exposes  the  Pentagon's  Multi-Million Dollar  Operation  Brainwash
On  June  12  Mendel  Rivers  told  the  House  that  "if  any
member  of  Congress  wants  to  introduce a  motion to  cut  the
budget  of  the  Defense   Department  Public  Affairs  Office  by
two-thirds   he  will   have   my  whole-hearted  support."  The
passing  remark  by  the  Pentagon's   Mr. Wonderful somehow
went   unnoticed  in   the   day's   business,   but  on   Dec.   4,   J.
William  Fulbright  remembered and  took  him  up  on  it.
By  the  Defense   Department's  own  accounting,  the  mili-
tary  spent  $27.7  million  this  year  shining  its  public  image.
That  represents  an  increase  of  more than  1000% since  1959,
the  year  Congress  removed limits  on  the  Pentagon's  public
affairs   fund.  During  the   same   period   the   total   defense
budget  has  increased  a  mere  60%  or  so  from  $46  to  $76
billion.  Fulbright  proposes  to  cut  the  P.R.  bankroll  to  $10
million  next  year,  a  step   which  he  says   is   "a  start—but
only   a   start"   in   bringing   the    Pentagon's   propaganda
machine  under  control.
This  P.R.  machine  overlooks  no  medium  or  public  rela-
tions   device  from   releases   for   hometown  newspapers   to
television  shows.  The  Air  Force  has  a  dandy half-hour  show
on   the   C-5A,   for   example.  The  Army  produces  the   Big
Picture  for  the  public's  TV-viewing  pleasure.  The  Dept.  of
Defense  keeps  5  camera  crews  in  Vietnam—the  equivalent
of   a  major  network's  complement—to  cover  the   "aspects
of  the  military  participation  in  S.E.  Asia  often  ignored  or
bypassed  by  national  media."  There   is   also  an  ambitious
program   of   public  speakers.   Gen.  Westmoreland,  for   ex-
ample,  gave  59  public  addresses   in  a  period  from  Aug.  7,
1968   to  May  1969.  Each  service  offers  junkets  for  "civilian
leaders."  Most  popular tours  are  to  Las  Vegas,  Hawaii  and
Florida.   There  is   even  Spotmaster,   which  is   like   Dial-a-
Prayer  for  military  types.  In  Washington  dial  OX  5-6201
for  the  latest  DOD news.
So  goes   the  Pentagon's   Operation  Brainwash.  As   Ful-
bright   stressed   in   each   of   his   four   speeches,   "there   is
something  basically  unwise  and  undemocratic  about  a  sys-
tem  which  taxes  the  public  .to  finance  a  propaganda  cam-
paign  aimed  at  persuading  the  same  taxpayers  that   they
must  spend  more  tax  dollars  to  subvert  their  independent
judgment."
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F.  Stone's  Weekly,   Dee.  15, 1969
Use  Of  Crop-Killers  in  Vietnam  Violates  U.S.  Army's  Own  Rules  of  War
(Continued  From Page  One)
barbarian  when  a  White   House   announcement,   designed   to
take  the  curse  off  Pinkville  and  demonstrate  our  concern   for
international   law,   perpetuates   a  gross   violation   of   it?   We
refer  to  the  use  of   crop-killers.   It  is  said  that  the   Geneva
Protocol   banning  chemical  warfare  does  not  mention  herbi-
cides.  True.   But  earlier  treaties  to  which  we  are  a  party  do.
The  Army  Field  Manual  (FM27-10)   in  paragraph   37  cites
that  provision  of  the  Hague  Convention  of   1907  which  says
"It  is  especially  forbidden  ...     to  employ  poison  or  poison
weapons."  The  Army  interpretation  which  follows  says  this
"does not prohibit  measures  ...    to  destroy,  through  chemical
or   bacteriological   agents,   harmless   to  man,   crops   intended
SOLELY   [our   emphasis]   for   consumption   by  the   armed
forces   (if  that  fact  can  be  determined)."  But  even  this  tor-
tuous  sophistry  admits  we  may  not  destroy  crops  just  because
we  believe  some  of  the  supplies  may  feed  guerrillas,  and  that
we  may  not  employ  chemical  or  bacteriological   agents  which
are  harmful  to  humans.
What  Herbicides  Do  To  Humans
Two  years  ago  the  Japan-Science  Council*   released  a  re-
port   on   anti-crop   warfare   in   Vietnam   which   said   nearly
1,000   peasants   and   more   than   13,000   livestock   had   been
killed   by  it.  Han   Swyter,  a  former   aide  to   Secretary  Mc-
Namara,   told  the  House   Foreign   Affairs   Committee  Dec.   2
that  since  1962  we have  sprayed  about  100  million  pounds  of
herbicides    over   four   million   acres,   an   area   the    size   of
Massachusetts.  He  said  that  since  late  1967  there  have  been
increasing  reports  and  pictures  in  the  Saigon  press  of  a  new
kind  of  abnormality  in  newly  born  children.  These   reports
have  found  confirmation  in  a  still  secret  report  for  the  Na-
tional  Cancer  Institute  (See  Scientific   Research for  Nov.   10)
which  found  that  one  herbicide,  2,4,5-T  was  "probably  dan-
gerous"   and   2,4-D   "potentially   dangerous"   as   teratogenic
agents,   i.e.   capable,   like  Thalidomide,   of   producing   gross
birth  defects  if  ingested  by  pregnant  women.  As  a  result  the
Pentagon   has  "restricted"  the  use  of   the  first,  but  not   the
What  Did  Nixon  Give  Up  On  Germ  War?
What  did  Nixon  give  up  on  Nov.  25  in  renouncing
the  use  of  bacteriological  weapons?   Congressman Mc-
Carthy,  a  one-man crusader  against  germ  and chemical
warfare,  said  in  his  Montreal  speech  Dec.  1  that  "bi-
ological  weapons  really  don't  have  any  military  value."
They  are  too  dangerous   to  use  and  too  difficult  to  de-
liver.  Even  so  it  remains to  be  seen  how  much  work on
germ  weapons   the   military  will  be  able  to   continue
under  cover  of  Nixon's  exception  for  "defensive   meas-
ures."  The  House  Appropriations  report   (Dec.   3)   on
the  1970 defense  budget  says  that  when  the  Committee
inquired  about  the  saving  to  be  expected  from  the  re-
nunciation  of  germ  warfare,  it  was  given  a  figure  of
only  $2  million! McCarthy's office  estimates  the  cost  of
germ  war  preparations  this  year  between  $40  and  $50
million.  Will  pretty  much  the  same  work  go  on  as  be-
fore,  but masked as defensive?
*p.   153  of   Seymour  M.  Hersh's  indispensable  recent  book
Chemical  and  Bacteriological  Warfare   (Bobbs Merrill).
second,  substance to  areas  remote  from  human  population.  But
how  much  reliance  can  be  placed  on  this  restriction  remains
to  be  seen  and  the  crop-killing  itself  goes  on.
So  will   the   civilian-killing   via  the   tear   gas   route.   The
government's   position   is  that  the  Geneva  Protocol  does  not
cover  tear  gas.  The  Protocol  itself   speaks   of   "asphyxiating,
poisonous   or   other   gases."   [Our    emphasis.]   The   British
government   ever  since  1930,   like  many  other   signatories  of
the   Protocol,   has  held   that   tear   gases,   too,   are   outlawed.
Congressman   McCarthy  (D.-N.Y.)  told  a  Montreal   audience
Dec.  1  that  when  in  London  he  heard  the  U. S.  government
was  pressuring  the  British  government  to  change  its  position
on  tear  gas.   This  is  not   academic  in  Britain.   Imagine   the
massacre  during  the  blitz  if  the  Nazis  had  been  able  to  flush
people  out  of  the  subways  and  other  shelters  with  tear  gases
before  the  bombing,  as we  do  in  Vietnam.
The  enormous  quantities  of  tear  and  lung  gas  we  use  in
Vietnam—almost  14 million  pounds  since  1964,  or  more  than
half  the  total  weight  of  the  mustard  gases  used  by  both  sides
in  World  War   I—testify  how  far  we  have  gone  from   ex-
ceptional  use  in  "riot-like"  circumstances  to  routine  applica-
tion   before  bombardment.    These  are  the   atrocities   Nixon
condones and  continues.
We'll  Be Clad to  Send A  Sample  Copy  of This  Issue To  A  Friend  —   Send  A  Stamped  Addressed  Envelope
FOR  STONE'S   NEW   BOOK
For  the   enclosed  $7.50  send  I.  F.   Stone's   book,  The
Hidden  History  of  The  Korean  War  (Monthly  Review
Press.)
(To)   Name
Street
City                                         Zip                 State
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished  Q
Please   renew   (or  enter)   a   sub  for   the   enclosed  .$5:
Name
Street
City                                        Zip                 State
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly                  12/15/69
4420  29th  St.  N.W.,  Washington,  D. C.  20008
E  Stone's  Weekly
Now  Published  Bi-Weekly
4420  29th   St.,     N.W.
Washington,  D. C.  20008
Second  class
postage   paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly.   2d  Class  Postage  Paid  at  Washington,   D.C.  Published  every  other  Monday except  in  August  at  4420  29th  St.,   N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.
An  independent  bi-weekly published and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager.  Esther  M.  Stone.   Subscription:  $5 in  the  U.S.;   ?6  in  Canada;
$10  elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17  to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED