I.F. Stone's Weekly
Article
Year: 1969
Filename: IFStonesWeekly-1969mar10.pdf

============================================================

Even Aviation   Wi't'k  Admits  The ABM   Futile,  P.  2
Like  Waiting   For  The  Second  Coming
"I   don't   know   just   what  connection  there   is   between
the  difficulties  in  the  Middle  East  and  the  mutual  interest
of   the  U.S.  and  the   Soviet  Union  to   avoid  an  escalation
of   the  arms  race,  and  if  you  are  going  to  wait  to   enter
the  conference  [on  nuclear  missiles]   until  peace  and  love
pre   .' 1  in   the   Middle   East,   or   until  there   is   no   longer
trouble  in  Southeast  Asia,  then  ABMs   [anti-ballistic  mis-
siles]  will  be  all  over  the  place  in  both  countries."
—Senator  Gore  (D.Tenn)   to  Secretary   of  Defense   Laird
at  the  Senate  Foreign  Relations  hearing  February  20
I. F. Stone's  Weekly
l\Tn    M j     i^/jM  /»It  chad    r£*—  \A/0£> k  At i                                     ^^
Now  Published  Bi-  Weekly
VOL.    XVII,  NO.   5
MARCH   10,  1969
WASHINGTON,  D.C.
20  CENTS
Can Nixon  Make  The  Hard   Choices?
President   Nixon   has   given   three   signals  which   provide
some  gleam  of  hope.    One  was  the  substitution  at  his  first
press   conference   of    "sufficiency"    for   "superiority"   as   the
standard   for  judging  America's  armed  forces;  coupled'with
this   was  his  explanation   that   the   less   abrasive  term   would
make  arms  negotiation  easier.    The   second   signal  was   the
sending  of  the  Nuclear  Non-Proliferation  Pact  to  the  Senate
before    his   trip   to   Europe.   This   placed   priority   on   arms
talks  with  the  Russians.   Had   he  gone   to  Europe  first,  this
would  have  meant  giving  the  wishes  of  the  NATO  powers—
in   particular   West   Germany—priority, consulting  them   in
advance,  allowing  the  West  Germans,  who  dislike the  treaty,
a  kind  of   veto.   By  sending   the   treaty  to   the   Senate  first,
Nixon   was  going   abroad  not   so  much   to   "consult",   as  to
allay  misgivings,  a  very  different  sort  of  operation.  The  mean-
ing  of  the  trip  was  made  plainer  when,  the  new  President
told   a  private  meeting  with   French   leaders*   that  limiting
the  arms  race  was  of  "enormous   importance"  but  had   to  be
negotiated  by  the  two  superpowers  alone.   The   third   signal
is  the  extraordinarily restrained  way  that  the  Nixon   Admin-
istration   is   taking   the   new   enemy   offensive    in   Vietnam;
normally   hawkish  U.S.   civilian   and   military   spokesmen   in
Saigon   seem,  from  a  close  reading  of  the   dispatches,  to  be
under   wraps   imposed   by  Washington.
Nixon  A  Leftist   Tool?
While   the   President   was   abroad,   ADA's   vice-chairman,
Arthur   Schlesinger,   Jr.,   held   a   press   conference   here   to
outline  its  program.   With  its  strong  emphasis  on  blocking
the  ABM  and  righting  the  influence  of  the military-industrial
complex   we  are  in   complete  agreement.    But  when   Schles-
inger  said  "No   new  President  in  memory  has  made  so  little
effort   in  his  first  weeks  in   office   to  define  his  purposes"   we
wonder  whether  he  did  not  speak  too  soon.   A  better  index
of   what   is  happening   may   be   furnished    by   the   speeches
Barry  Goldwater  has  begun  to  make  against  the  Non-Prolifer-
ation  Pact,  opening  a  rift  between  him  and  the  new  Repub-
lican  Administration.  From  a  speech  to  the  University  Club
in  New  York  Feb.  22  by  Goldwater  I  lift  a  delicious sentence
for  the  future  historian.   "The   push  for  ratification,"  Gold-
water   said,   "is   part   of   the   emotionalism   with   which   the
Radical  Left  would  like  to  conduct  all  of  our  foreign   affairs
in  today's  world."   Barely a  month  after  the  Inaugural  Gold-
water   seemed  to  be  implying  that  Nixon   is  a   Leftist   tool.
Is  Helen  Gahagan  Douglas  in  the  house ?
Goldwater  said  the  treaty  "would  have  a  highly  deleterious
Laird's  Latest  Whopper
"They   [the   Russians]   are  the  only  country  in  the
world  that  has  actually  fired  an  ABM  at  a  missile  and
have  conducted  tests  in  the  atmosphere  with  missiles."
—Laird   before   Senate  Foreign   Relations   Feb.  20
"As  long  as  seven  years  ago  we  demonstrated  we
could  with  confidence  destroy  single  incoming  missiles."
—Secretary  Clifford    to Senator Russell  June  18,1968,
at  p.  59,  Senate  Foreign   Relations   hearings   last   July
on  the  Nonproliferation     Treaty.
"The     Army  announced  Dec.   21   that   a   Nike-Zeus
anti-missile   missile   test-fired   at    the   White   Sands
(New     Mexico)  missile  range   had  successfully  inter-
cepted  a  missile   flight   for  the   first   time."
—p.   478A1,  Pacts  on  File  for   the  Year  1961
"Henry  Tanner  from  Paris,  New  York  Times  March  2.
effect  on  the  Atlantic  Alliance."   The  same  charge  has  been
made   by   two   others   who   helped    elect   Nixon   and   now
oppose  the  treaty,   Senators  Tower  of  Texas  and  Thurmond
of   South   Carolina.   The   trip   to  NATO  Europe   may  have
been   designed   also  to  protect  Nixon's   flank   at  home.    For
some   Republicans  there   must   seem   to  be  a  Nixon   Gap—
between  the  man  Before  and  After  his  election.*   The  move
toward  detente  which   antagonizes  them  and  encourages  us
may   prove   of   short   duration.    A   prime   danger   is   a   new
Berlin  crisis;  if  the  precarious   applecart  isn't  upset  by   "our"
Germans   it   may  be  upset   by  "theirs."    Whatever    happens
Nixon  has  already put  the  prestige  of  his  Administration  and
the  unity  of  his  party  on  the  line  by  sending   the  Non-Pro-
liferation   Treaty   to  the  Senate.   To  win   its  ratification,   he
must   look   for   support   to   those  who   opposed   him   in   the
past.    The   most   dramatic  evidence   of   this   reversal   is   fur-
nished   by   the   Senate   Foreign   Relations   Committee   under
Fulbright,   which   is   favorably  reporting   the   treaty   to   the
Senate  while  the   Armed   Services  Committee   under   Stennis
(Continued   on  Page   Two)
*And   not   in   foreign  policy   alone.    The   Baltimore  Sun
Feb.    21  said  Southern  Republicans   had  been  so  alienated
by  Nixon's  action   during  his  first   month  that  some   ques-
tioned   whether   he   could   carry   any   of   the   11   Southern
States   today.   "Probably  no  Southern  Republican  is   more
embarrassed  and  jeopardized,"  the  Sun  reported, "than  Sena-
tor  Thurmond  who  risked  his  political  standing  by  working
hard   for  Mr.  Nixon  throughout  the   South."    A  bitter   pill
was  James  Farmer's  appointment  as  an  Assistant  Secretary
of   HEW   the   same   day   that   school   aid   was   shut   off   to
Greenwood,  S.C.  with  no  provision  for  a  grace  period.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  10, 1969
(Continued   from  Page  One)
has  scheduled  hearings  designed  to  put  stumbling  blocks  in
the   way  of   ratification.
Symington   Shifts   Sides
The  liberal   committee  is  on  Nixon's  side  while  the  right-
wing  one  is  swinging  against  him.   Each  is  invading  the  ju-
risdiction  of   the  other.    Armed   Services  muscled  in  on   the
treaty  on  the  excuse  that  it  wanted  to  examine  the  "military
implications"    while   one    Foreign    Relations   subcommittee
under  Gore  has  launched  hearings  into  the   ABM   and   an-
other   under   Symington   into   our   commitments   and   bases
abroad  on  the  ground  that  they  wish  to  examine  the  foreign
policy  implications  of   matters  which  normally  are  the   con-
cern   of   Armed   Services.   The   latter's  chairman,   Stennis,  is
the   Pentagon's   No.    1  ally   in   Congress   while  Fulbright   is
militarism's  foremost  critic.   The   most  significant   by-play  in
this   struggle   is  that   Symington,  the   only  Senator   on   both
committees,   a  former   Air   Force  Secretary,  has   shifted   from
a   champion   of   the   military   to   a   disillusioned   opponent.
Normally,  by  seniority,  Symington  would  have  become  chair-
man    of    the    powerful    Preparedness    subcommittee    when
Stennis   succeeded  Russell   as   chairman  of   the   full   Armed
Services   committee.    But   rather  than   allow   a   critic  of   the
military  so  vital  a  post,   Stennis  is  holding  onto  both   chair-
manships.    Symington  knows   where   the   bodies   are   buried
because  he  helped   in  the  past   to  bury  them.
Nixon   is  going   to   find   it   much   harder   to
v
  change   his
course  at  home  than  he  has  his  "image"  abroad.   Some  hard
choices   lie   ahead.    The   first   decision   is   the   ABM,   and   a
related   question   is  what   to   do   about   the   Goldwaterite  he
chose  as  Secretary  of  Defense.*    Laird  is  campaigning  for   a
Wanna  Bet   Dept.
Sen.  JAVITS  (R.N.Y.)—Do  you  see  the  world  lining
up  into  the  power  blocs  with  the  Soviet  Union  serving
Czechoslovakia,  Hungary,  Bulgaria   and  so  forth   and
the  U.S.  serving  its  friends  in  the  world  with  peaceful
uses  of  atomic  energy   [under  the  Nuclear  Non-Prolif-
eration  Treaty]  and  a  nation  like  Czechoslovakia  being
up  for  grabs  or  how  do  you  see  this  thing  working?
Dr.  SEABORG  (Chmn.  Atomic Energy  Commission):
As  a  practical  matter  it  would  in  large  part,  at  least,
start  that  way.  I  could  picture,  however,  particularly
if  this  treaty  is  as  successful  as  we  hope  it  will  be,
that  these  lines  won't  be  drawn.   I  could  picture  situ-
ations  under  which  it  would  be  to  our  advantage,   for
example,  to   go  into   Czechoslovakia  and  furnish  this
service  for  them.
Sen.  JAVITS:   And  we  couldn't  scream   very  loudly
if  the  Russians  went  into  Latin  America,  into  Peru.
Dr.  SEABORG:  I  would  say  as  the  treaty  developed
and  if  it  served   the  purpose  that  we  hoped  it  would,
we  could  look  forward  to  such  action  with  equanimity.
Sen.   Foreign  Relations   treaty   hearing   Feb.  18.
build-up   not   only   of   an   ABM   but   of   strategic    offensive
missiles.   "We   are  now  second  to  the  Soviet. Union"   in  nu-
clear  strength,  Goldwater  said  in  the  speech   from  which  we
have  already  quoted,   and   Laird   is  doing  his   best   to  create
the  same  impression.   Nixon   can  hardly  expect   the  Russians
to  take  missile  talks  seriously  if  Nixon   allows  Laird  to   go
on  propagating   such  dangerous   nonsense.   Indeed   it  is   diffi-
cult   to   understand  why  Nixon   wanted   Senator   Jackson   as
*Laird   in   turn   has   picked   one   of   Goldwater's   brain-
trusters   in  the   1964  campaign,   G.  Warren   Nutter,   to   be
Assistant   Secretary   of   Defense   for   International    Security
Affairs.    This   division  is   the   Pentagon's   own  "State  De-
partment"   and  has  considerable  influence   on  foreign   policy
and  arms  negotiations.    The  Washington   Post,  which  swal-
lowed   Laird's   Goldwaterite   record   with   no   more   than   a
slight   gulp,   balked   editorially   at   Nutter   and   particularly
his  "harsh  and  somewhat   simplistic   views"   on  U.S.    Soviet
relations.   (See  its  editorial  "A  Strange   Appointment  at  the
Pentagon"  Feb.   23  and  its  staff   man,  Don  Oberdorfer's  ex-
clusive  on  Nutter,  Feb.   18.)    Nutter's  nomination  has   since
been   approved   by  the   Senate   Armed   Services   Committee.
Laird  has  also  named  Grant   L.  Hansen,   a  vice-president  of
General   Dynamics'  least  successful  division,   Convair,  to  be
Assistant   Secretary   of   the   Air   Force   for   Research   and
Development.   Convair  is  the  main  contractor  for  the  notori-
ous  F-lll.
Some Extraordinary  Admissions  on Arms  Race  and  ABM In  An  Aerospace  Organ
"The   U.S.   and  the   USSR  are   facing  a  dilemma  in  de-
fense   expenditures.    Both   are   spending   more   and  getting
less   in   the   way   of   protection   and   relative   stability   of
position  in  relation  to  each  other.   In  both   countries,   the
defense   dilemma  has  reached   such   proportions   that  it  is
forcing   major   policy  changes   on  the   two   governments.
"The   U.S.  appears  to  be  heading  for  a  point  of  diminish-
ing  return  in  the  amount  of  money  it  can  prudently  pour
into  its   defense  establishment   and  toward   a  dead  end  in
the   mainstream   of   technological   development   that   once
gave  it  a  significant  superiority   over  the  Soviet   Union.
"A   decade   of   furious   technical   development   has   given
the   Soviet   Union  the   opportunity   to   draw   close   enough
to  the   U.S.   in  land-  and  sea-based   nuclear   missile   power
to   erode   the   margin   of   measurable   military   significance.
The  same  decade  of  inflationary spiral  has  also  drastically
reduced   the   genuine  military   value   bought   by  the    U.S.
defense   budgets  that  have  risen   about   $40  billion  in  that
interval.    During  the   last   half   of   this   decade,   the    U.S.
involvement   in   Southeast    Asia   has   drained   nearly   half
of  the defense  budget  into the rat  hole  of Asian  combat  . . .
"The   Pentagon   is   from   $20  to   $80  billion  short   in  fi-
nancing  its  current  requirements.   This  is  a  pretty   sizable
deficit   even  for  the  biggest  business   in  the   world.   It   is
pretty   grim  news  for  the  taxpayers   whose  tattered   shirts
must  be wrung further  to  plug  the  gap.   This  is  one  of  the
reasons  so  many  misgivings   are  now  crystallizing   around
the   Sentinel   anti-ballistic    missile   system.    It  is  becoming
apparent   that   deployment   of   this   system   will   add   an
enormous  new  increment—from  $15  to  $20  billion—to   the
defense   budget   without    offering      any   real   possibility    of
making   the  nation  more   secure   .  '. .  [Italics   added]
"The  tremendous  progress  of  the  Soviet  Union  in  modern
military   technologies  has  been  achieved  at  an  even  higher
relative   cost  than  that  in  the  U.S.   And,  like  the  U.S.,   the
Soviets  have  found  no  real  military  security  in  the  mighty
array   of   supersonic   aircraft,   nuclear   missiles   and   sub-
marine  fleets.  They  have  been  hard-pressed   to  keep  within
hailing   distance   of   U.S.   military   technology.  ' They   have
been  unable  to  exert  any  real  leverage  with  their  mflitary
power  except  along   the   geographic   borders  of  the   Soviet
Union.
"These  then  are  the  internal   pressures  that  are  driving
the  leaders   of  both  countries  to  seek  some  sort  of  accom-
modation  to  level  off or  limit  the  portions  of  their  national
budgets   they   must   devote  to   military   forces.    For   with
both   countries   already   operating   at   an  oppressively   high
level  of  defense  expenditures,  any   new  technological  race
or  even  a  drastic   expansion  of  present   force  levels  could
ignite   economic  and  political   explosions  .  .  ."
Editorial   "The   Defense   Dilemma"   in  Aviation  Week  &
Space   Technology,  Feb.   2J/t,  by   its   editor,   Robert   Hotz..
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  10, 1969
Secretary  of  Defense   and   took  Laird  as  second   choice  if   he
planned   seriously  to   negotiate  some   brakes   on   the   missile
race.
Jackson   on   Meet    the   Press   March    2   produced    a   new
series  of  nightmares to  support  the  Sentinel  anti-ballistic mis-
sile  system.   Since  the  Chinese  menace  is  wearing  thin,  Jack-
son  substituted  some  new  fantasies  about  an  FOBS  system  he
said  the  Russians  had   as  a  "first  strike"  weapon   against  our
bombers!   A  first strike which  started  with  our  bombers  would
be  the   surest  way  for   the   Russians   to   unleash   our   missiles
and   commit  suicide.   He   also  pictured  Russian  Polaris   sub-
marines  rolling  off  the  assembly  lines,  as  bombers  once  were
pictured  in  the  days  of  the  bomber  gap.   So  now  the  Sentinel
is   to   be   aimed   at   the   Russians,  and   if   that   won't    work,
perhaps  it  might   be  drummed   up  as  extra  protection   in  the
event  of  an  invasion  from  Mars.
40  Congressmen  Speak  Out
There  has  never  been  as  much  antagonism   in  Congress   as
now   to  the   ABM   and   to   the   military  in   general.    In   the
Senate   the   anti-ABM   forces   under   John   Sherman   Cooper,
Kentucky's  Republican   elder   statesman,  may  be  able  with  a
little  extra  push  from  the  country  to  marshal  a  majority  and
block   the   ABM.    In   the  House,   three   Democrats,    Cohelan
(Cal),  Giaimo  (Conn)  and  Yates  (///)  filed  a minority  report
on  the   1969  construction  bill  Feb.  24  and  obtained   a  special
order  for   a  debate  on  the  floor  two   days  later.    More   than
40  members  spoke  that  day  against  the  ABM;   their   speeches
and   inserts,  covering   72  pages   of   that   day's    Congressional
Record  are  a  mine  of  ammunition against  this  expensive  folly.
Unfortunately   the  American  public  has  a  tendency  to  think
problems   are   solved   when   moved   away.    If   the   Pentagon
now   moves   the   missiles   and   radars   away    from    the   big
cities,   much   of   the   public's   concern   may   evaporate.    This
would   be  the   nuclear   equivalent   of   the  white   flight   to   the
suburbs.
Anyone   foolish   enough   to   be   taken   in   by   commentators
who   scoff   at  the  idea  of  a  military-industrial complex  should
read   the   16-page   "Public    Affairs   Plan   For   The    Sentinel
Ahop's   Occult   Annals
Unseen,  Unpredictable,  Unknowable  .  .  .*
"Unseen,   indeed  invisible,  quite   unreported  in   the
world  press,  with  results  as  yet  unknowable,  a  major
battle  is  now  in  progress  in  Vietnam.   This  may  seem
very   eery.   ...       It  says   much   about   the   universal
misunderstanding   of    the   pattern   of    the   war,   that
almost  no  notice  has  been  taken  of  a  phenomenon  so
novel,  so  strange  and so  remarkable as  this  battle  that
is  now  going  on.  Yet  twice  before,  as  was  also  pointed
out  in  this  space,  the  B-52s  have  defeated  enemy  divi-
sions,  almost  unaided by  our  ground  troops  .  .  .  There
is   nothing   shadowy,   please    remember,   about   these
earlier   episodes.    After   the   enemy   divisions   have  re-
treated,   enough   evidence   is   always   collected   in   the
end  so   that   what  has   happened  is   known  with   real
certainty.  .  .  .  Yet  the  present  shadowy  battle  is  much
more   important   than   its   predecessors   ...       If   (and
one  must  triply  underline  this  'if")  this  new  offensive
can  also  be  repelled  by  almost  unaided  B-52s,  then   the
Hanoi   Politbureau  will   have   to   draw   some    honestly
dark  conclusions  .  .  .  But  for  the  present  the  outcome
is  unpredictable,  as  well  as   unknowable."
—Joseph  Alsop's  column  of  February  19
*  Except,   of   course,  to   one  modest  correspondent.
System."   A  leak  to  the  Washington  Post  Feb.   16  forced   the
Pentagon   to  release  it.   Its  provisions   for  a  coordinated  cam-
paign   of   press,  magazine,   TV   and   radio  publicity   "apply"
it  says  "to  all  U.S.   Army  elements  and  to  all  individual   in-
dustrial  firms  and  civilian   contractors   (our  italics)   participat-
ing   in   the   production   and   deployment   of   the  SENTINEL
System."    The  memorandum   outlining   this  propaganda  cam-
paign  was  addressed  by  Stanley  R.  Resor,   the  present   Secre-
tary   of   the   Army,   last   year   to   then   Secretary   of   Defense
Clark  Clifford.    The  leak,  as  the  Washington  Post  said  in  an
editorial,   "The   Big  ABM  Brainwash"    (Feb    17),   laid   bare
the   "clandestine    complicity   with   the  contractors   ...       to
(Continued  on  Page  Four)
Portrait  Of An Admiral Caught  In The Umteenth  Pratt-Fall  Of  Its  Kind  In  The Viet  War
Q.  Admiral  McCain,  what   is   the   military  situation   in
Vietnam?    A.  We  have   the  enemy   licked   now  ...       he
cannot   even   mount   another   major   offensive.
—"The   Enemy   Is   Beaten"   Interview   ^vith   the   Com-
mander-Chief,     Pacific,   in   Reader's   Digest   for    February.
Fulbright  protested  its  publication  to  Secretary  Laird  at  a
Foreign   Relations   Commitee    'hearing   Feb.   20   as   "very
provocative"   and   damaging    to  the   peace   talks   in   Paris.
Fulbright   said   we  had   heard   this   optimism   before    "and
it   didn't   turn  out   quite   that   way."    The   enemy      offensive
three   days   later   and   the   following    dispatch    shows   hoio
right  he  was:
"The  Americans  in  Vietnam  today  officially  declared  that
the  fighting  over  the  past  four  days,  which  has  cost  200
American  lives,  and  more  than  2,000  Vietcong  lives,  could
now  be  called  'the  communist offensive.'   They  also  released
a   short   statement    on   a   Wednesday   morning  attack   on
Cu  Chi  base,  headquarters  of  the  American  25th  Infantry
Division  and  one  of   the  largest   and  best-defended   camps
in  Vietnam.   The  base,  the   official   report  laconically said,
received   10  enemy  rockets,   and  some   mortar  shells.    The
statement    went    on:   'Simultaneously,   an   unknown   size
enemy  force  probed  three  locations   of  the   perimeter,  em-
ploying   small   arms   and  rocket-grenade   fire.   During   the
action,   an   unknown  number  of   enemy   sappers   carrying
satchel  charges  infiltrated  a  portion  of   the  perimeter and
caused   light   material   damage   before   being   killed  or  re-
pelled.'
"As  it   happened,  some   newspaper   reporters   visited  Cu
Chi  base  this  morning.   This  is  what  we  saw  had  actually
occurred.   Twelve  large  double  rotored   Chinook  helicopters
were   put  out   of   action   by   Vietcong   saboteurs.    Nine   of
these   were  destroyed.   They  lay,  charred  wrecks,  in  their
protective  bunkers.   An  ammunition dump  was   blown  up.
The  total  cost  of  the  helicopters   and  ammunition,   bearing
in   mind   that   each   Chinook  costs  £700,000   [$1.68m.]   was
more  than  £7m   [$16.8m.].   The  destruction  took   only  five
minutes.
"The   Cu  Chi  base   is   one   of   the   six   most   important
American   military  establishments   in   Vietnam.    It   is   the
headquarters   for   the   whole   area   to   the   north-west    of
Saigon  towards  Cambodia, through which North  Vietnamese
forces   are  advancing  towards   the  capital.   The  base   had
received  clear  intelligence   that  it  was  to  be  attacked.    Yet
80  Vietcong  sappers   managed   to   spend   three   and  a  half
hours  cutting  through  the  10  barbed  wire  fences  that  pro-
tect   Cu  Chi  perimeter,  without  any  of   the  American  am-
bush  patrols,  sentries,  and  bunker  defence  units  detecting
them  ...
"For  half  an  hour  the  gathered   reporters   appeal  to  the
information  men  to  allow  them  to  write  the  truth.   'Light
damage,'  we  argue,  just  seems  ridiculous.  The  audience  of
journalists,   uncomfortably  aware   of   the   reassuring   copy
many  of  them  had  been  sending  home,  hope  that  the  entire
military  situation  in  Vietnam  has  not  been  distorted  as  has
that   at   Cu  Chi."
—Nicholas  Tomalin, London  Times  Feb.  27.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED

/.  F. Stone's  Weekly,  March  10,1969
The  U.S.  Has  Spent  A  Trillion  Dollars  On  Weaponry  In  20  Years
(Continued  from  Page  Three)
tout  the  virtues  of  this  weapons  system;  the  unabashed  in-
tention   to   plant  or   inspire   favorable   magazine  articles   by
scientists"  friendly  to  the  military  or  under  obligation   to  the
Pentagon.   We   hope  the  Gore  subcommittee in  its  hearings
on  the  ABM  will  focus  wider  attention on  how  the  Pentagon
can  secretly  use  public  funds   to  mold  public  opinion.   This
is  Big  Brotherism  in  action.   When  Laird  before  the  Senate
Foreign  Relations  Committee  Feb.   20,  sought  to  defend   the
General  in  charge  of  the  SENTINEL  campaign  as  "outstand-
ing",  Fulbright   replied—
Nothing  I  have  said  should  be  interpreted  to  mean  they
are  not  outstanding.   The  danger  is   they  are  too  out-
standing.   You  give  them  the  ability  together   with  80
billion   dollars   and  there   is   no   force   in   this  country
can  stand  up  against   them.   That  is  what  bothers  me.
The  Eisenhower   Precedent
Laird   told   Senate   Foreign   Relations   the   Russians   had
held   up   their   ABM   system   around   Moscow   in   order   to
develop   an  improved  model.    The  easiest  way  for  Nixon  to
handle  the  ABM  issue  would  be  to  do  the  same,   and  hold
up   deployment   for   more   research   and   development.    He
could   cite  the  best  of  precedents  for  this—Eisenhower's   re-
jection  in  1959  of  the  Nike-Zeus   system  when  it  was  recom-
mended  by  the  Army.   Dr.  John   S.  Foster,  whom  Laird  has
retained   as  Director   of   Research   at   the   Pentagon,   told   a
Gore  disarmament  subcommittee  hearing   just  two  years  ago
that   Nike-Zeus   would   have" cost   $13   to   $14   billion   and
"most  of   it  would   have  had   to  be   torn   out   and   replaced
almost   before   it   became  operational"   by  the   new  Nike-X
system,   now   called   Sentinel.    "By   the   same   token,"    Dr.
Foster   warned,   "other   technological    developments"    would
soon  make  Nike-X   obsolete  in   turn.
The   cynical  answer  to  this  was  provided   by  Congressman
Roman  Pucinski  of   Chicago,   one  of  the  Sentinel's  support-
ers.    "I   realize,"   he  told   a  private  briefing  held   by   Gen.
Starbird—Sentinel's   "manager"—to  try  and  quiet   opposition
among   big  city  Congressmen*,   "that   as  we  move  along   in
military  technology,  almost  in  every  instance  whatever  we  do
And  (If  An  H-Bomb Falls)   Don't   Forget
Your  Zip  Code
"If   prevented  from  reporting   for   work  because   of
an  enemy  attack,  all  selective  service  employees  are
to  go  to  the  nearest  post  office,  get  a  Federal  employee
registration  card,   fill   it  out  and  give  it  to  the  post-
master.   He   will   send  it   to   the   Civil   Service   which
will   inform   National   or  State   Headquarters   and  the
employee  will  be  told  where  to  report  for  duty."
—Selective   Service,   organ   of   the   Selective   Service
System,  February  1909
•Sentinel  Anti-Ballistic  Missile  Briefing.   House  Appropri-
ation  Committee,  Jan.  15  released  Feb.  11.
becomes   almost   obsolete   before   it   comes   off   the    drawing
board.   That  is  the  story  of  the  defense  establishment.   That
is  the  story  of  progress.   We  have  spent  a  trillion  dollars  on
defense  hardware  in   the   last   20  years.   Much   of   that  has
become  obsolete  before  it  came  into  the  field.  But  we  cannot
afford  not  to  have  this  system."   If  we  waste  another  trillion
dollars  on  military  hardware  in  the  next  20  years,  our  whole
social  system  may  become  obsolete.
Either  a  secretive,  headstrong  and   (as   events  in  so  many
spheres  have  shown)   incompetent  military  bureaucracy  will
be  cut  down  to   size  now  or  the   sky  will  be  the  limit  on
arms   expenditures.    "The    hard   fact    is,"    former   Defense
Secretary  Clifford   told  the  American  Paper  Institute  in   New
York   Feb.   17,   "we   may   never   again   expect   to   be   in   as
favorable   a  position   as  we  now   enjoy   for   entry  into   talks
about   a   freeze   in   strategic   nuclear   armaments."    He   said
technological   developments   would  soon   make  agreement   far
more   difficult.    The   combination  of   the   ABM   and   MIRV,
the  multiple  warhead,  will  breed  suspicion  and  panic,  setting
off   a  completely  new   spiral.    Our   last   hope   of  freeing  re-
sources  for  the  racial  and  urban  crises  lies  in  a  quick  freeze
now  of  missile  and  anti-missile and  a  cease-fire  in  Vietnam.
There   the   guerrillas  by   attacking  more   than   200   military
outposts  and  cities  all  over  the  country  night  after  night  for
a  week  have  demonstrated   that  they  can  strike  at  will  any-
where  they  choose  despite  all  the  pap  our  military have  been
giving  us  about  the  enemy  being  on  the  ropes.   They  have
also  demonstrated  that  we  could  not  escalate  the  war,  as  we
have  been  doing  since  the  peace  talks  in  Paris  started,  with-
out  provoking   a  counter-offensive,  and   a  sharp   rise  in  our
casualties.                                                                          March  2
Sorry  Due  to  Recent  Dock  Strike  Copies  of  "The   Haunted   Fifties"   Have   Not   Yet   Arrived—We  Will   Send
Them  Out,  As  Soon  As  They  Do
FOR  STONE'S  NEW   BOOK
For  the  enclosed  $6.95  send  I.  F.  Stone's  new book,  In
A Time  of Torment  (Random
House)  regular price  $7.95
(To)   Name
Street
City
Please
Name
Street
City
5618
Zip
State.
Indicate  if  gift   announcement  wished
renew   (or  enter)  a
Zip
D
sub  for   the   enclosed   $5:
Stats
I.  F.  Stone's  Weekly
Nebraska  Ave.,  N. W.,
Washington,  D.
3/10/69
C.  20015
/  E Stone's  Weekly
5618    Nebraska   Ave.,   N.  W.
Washington,  D. C.  20015
Second  class
postage  paid
at
Washington,  D. C.
I.   F.   Stonv's   Weekly.    Second   Class  Postage   Paid   at   Washington,  D.   C.    Published every  other  Monday at  5618 Nebraska  Ave.,  N.W.,  Washington,   D. C.
An  independent   weekly  published  and  edited  by  I.  F.  Stone;   Circulation  Manager,  Esther  M.  Stone.    Subscription:  $5  in  the  U.S.:   {6  in  Canada;
$10 elsewhere.   Air  Mail  rates:  $17 to  Europe;  $20  to  Israel,  Asia  and  Africa.
LICENSED TO UNZ.ORG
ELECTRONIC REPRODUCTION PROHIBITED